Summary of findings Summary of findings 1 Dietary interventions versus control for preventing obesity in children aged two to four years Population: children aged two to four years Setting: childcare, home, childcare plus home, others (e.g. community, healthcare setting) Intervention: dietary interventions Comparison/control: no active intervention Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI) No. of participants (studies) Certainty of the evidence (GRADE**) Comments Without intervention* With dietary interventions (mean difference) BMI short‐term (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months) Average BMI = 15.85 The mean BMI score at short‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0 points different (0.28 points lower to 0.28 points higher). 94 (1 study) ⊕⊕⊖⊖ Low a Dietary interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up. BMI medium‐term (9 months to < 15 months) One study reported no difference in BMI between preschool‐based nutritional intervention versus control at medium‐term follow‐up. 103 (1 study) ⊕⊕⊖⊖ Low b Dietary interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up. BMI long‐term (> 15 months) One study found a lower prevalence of overweight and obesity in the intervention group than the control group at long‐term follow‐up. 2238 (1 study) ⊕⊕⊖⊖ Low c Dietary interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at long‐term follow‐up. zBMI short‐term (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at short‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.03 points higher (0.13 points lower to 0.19 points higher). 145 (2 studies) ⊕⊕⊕⊖ Moderate d Dietary interventions likely result in little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up. zBMI medium‐term (9 months to < 15 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at medium‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.17 points lower (0.44 points lower to 0.10 points higher). 389 (1 study) ⊕⊕⊕⊖ Moderate e Dietary interventions likely result in little to no effect on zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up. zBMI long‐term (> 15 months) Not reported Serious adverse events Not reported *The median BMI without the intervention is the 50th percentile values of BMI in children aged 3 years (short term; ~ 6 months), 3.5 years (medium term; ~ 12 months) and 4 years (long term; ~18 months), derived from the CDC 2000 growth charts for boys and girls; the median zBMI without intervention is calculated from the zBMI of participants in the control group of our included studies measured at follow‐up. **Criteria for judging certainty in the evidence are reported in Supplementary material 11 . BMI: body mass index; CI: confidence interval; MD: mean difference; zBMI: standardised BMI GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High certainty: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate certainty: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low certainty: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited; the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. Very low certainty: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect. a Downgraded one level for imprecision (evidence from 94 participants); downgraded one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies), as assessed by the ROB‐ME tool (Risk Of Bias due to Missing Evidence). b Downgraded one level for imprecision (evidence from 103 participants); one level for publication bias (outcome non‐reporting bias: there is the potential for missing evidence). c Downgraded one level for imprecision (evidence from 2238 participants); one level for publication bias (outcome non‐reporting bias: there is the potential for missing evidence). d Downgraded one level for imprecision (evidence from 145 participants). e Downgraded one level for imprecision (evidence from 389 participants). Summary of findings 2 Activity interventions versus control for preventing obesity in children aged two to four years Population: children aged 2 to 4 years Setting: childcare, home, childcare plus home, others (e.g. community, health care setting) Intervention: activity interventions Comparison/control: no active intervention Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI) No. of participants (studies) Certainty of the evidence (GRADE**) Comments Without intervention* With activity interventions (mean difference) BMI short‐term (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months) Average BMI = 15.85 The mean BMI score at short‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.10 points lower (0.28 points lower to 0.08 points higher). 826 (6 studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low a Activity interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. BMI medium‐term (9 months to < 15 months) Average BMI = 15.63 The mean BMI score at medium‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.70 points lower (1.09 points lower to 0.31 points lower). 567 (1 study) ⊕⊕⊕⊖ Moderate b Activity interventions likely reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up. BMI long‐term (> 15 months) Not reported zBMI short‐term (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at short‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.06 points lower (0.19 points lower to 0.07 points higher). 635 (3 studies) ⊕⊕⊕⊖ Moderate c Activity interventions likely result in little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up. zBMI medium‐term (9 months to < 15 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at medium‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0 points different (0.12 points lower to 0.11 points higher). 1083 (4 Studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low d Activity interventions may have little to no effect on zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. zBMI long‐term (> 15 months) Not reported Serious adverse events One study reported that no harm or unintended effects related to the intervention were observed. One study reported the number of accidents and infections among the participating children during the study period, and reported that there was no difference between the intervention and control groups in rates of accidents and infections. 773 (2 studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low e Activity interventions may have little to no effect on severe adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain. *The median BMI without the intervention is the 50th percentile values of BMI in children aged 3 years (short term; ~ 6 months), 3.5 years (medium term; ~ 12 months) and 4 years (long term; ~18 months), derived from the CDC 2000 growth charts for boys and girls; the median zBMI without intervention is calculated from the zBMI of participants in the control group of our included studies measured at follow‐up. **Criteria for judging certainty in the evidence are reported in Supplementary material 11 . BMI: body mass index; CI: confidence interval; MD: mean difference; zBMI: standardised BMI GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High certainty: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate certainty: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low certainty: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited; the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. Very low certainty: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect. a Downgraded one level for risk of bias (evidence contributing 43% of the weight was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for imprecision (evidence from 877 participants); one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies). b Downgraded one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies). c Downgraded one level for imprecision (evidence from 635 participants). d Downgraded two levels for risk of bias (evidence contributing 75% of the weight was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for imprecision (evidence from 1083 participants). e Downgraded one level for risk of bias (evidence at high risk of bias accounted for more than 30% of the weight in the meta‐analysis); one level for imprecision (evidence is from 773 participants); one level for publication bias (outcome non‐reporting bias: there is the potential for missing evidence). Summary of findings 3 Combined dietary plus activity interventions versus control for preventing obesity in children aged two to four years Population: children aged two to four years Setting: childcare, home, childcare plus home, others (e.g. community, health care setting) Intervention: combined dietary/activity interventions Comparison/control: no active intervention Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI) No. of participants (studies) Certainty of the evidence (GRADE**) Comments Without intervention* With dietary and activity interventions (MD) BMI short‐term (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months) Average BMI = 15.85 The mean BMI score at short‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.08 points lower (0.20 points lower to 0.04 points higher). 3867 (13 studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low a Dietary and activity interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. BMI medium‐term (9 months to < 15 months) Average BMI = 15.63 The mean BMI score at medium‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.05 points lower (0.18 points lower to 0.08 points higher). 7016 (9 studies) ⊕⊕⊖⊖ Low b Dietary and activity interventions may result in little to no difference in BMI at medium‐term follow‐up. BMI long‐term (> 15 months) Average BMI = 15.46 The mean BMI score at long‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.20 points lower (0.39 points lower to 0.01 points lower). 2074 (5 studies) ⊕⊕⊖⊖ Low c Dietary and activity interventions may result in a slight reduction in BMI at long‐term follow‐up. zBMI short‐term (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at short‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.03 points lower (0.07 points lower to 0.01 points higher). 5518 (14 studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low d Dietary and activity interventions may result in little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. zBMI medium‐term (9 months to < 15 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at medium‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.07 points lower (0.11 points lower to 0.04 points lower). 11,043 (15 studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low e Dietary and activity interventions may result in a slight reduction in zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. zBMI long‐term (> 15 months) Average zBMI in the general population is 0 by definition. zBMI in included studies ranged from ‐0.15 to 1.79 with a median of 0.42. The mean zBMI score at medium‐term follow‐up in the intervention group was, on average, 0.07 points lower (0.13 points lower to 0.01 points lower). 4693 (10 studies) ⊕⊕⊖⊖ Low f Dietary and activity interventions may result in a slight reduction in zBMI at long‐term follow‐up. Serious adverse events Four studies reported serious adverse events. Of these, three studies stated no adverse events were reported for any participants. One study reported that one parent fractured an ankle while roller‐skating at a community centre, but no other adverse events were reported as a result of the intervention. 1689 (4 studies) ⊕⊖⊖⊖ Very low g Dietary and activity interventions may have little to no effect on severe adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain. *The median BMI without the intervention is the 50th percentile values of BMI in children aged 3 years (short term; ~ 6 months), 3.5 years (medium term; ~ 12 months) and 4 years (long term; ~18 months), derived from the CDC 2000 growth charts for boys and girls; the median zBMI without intervention is calculated from the zBMI of participants in the control group of our included studies measured at follow‐up. **Criteria for judging certainty in the evidence are reported in Supplementary material 11 . BMI: body mass index; CI: confidence interval; MD: mean difference; zBMI: standardised BMI GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High certainty: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate certainty: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low certainty: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited; the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. Very low certainty: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect. a Downgraded two levels for risk of bias (evidence contributing 75% of the weight was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for inconsistency (> 40% heterogeneity and direction of results are inconsistent). b Downgraded one level for inconsistency (> 40% heterogeneity and direction of results are inconsistent); one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies). c Downgraded one level for risk of bias (evidence accounting for most of the weight in the meta‐analysis was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for indirectness (33% of studies required eligible children to have a certain BMI to be included). d Downgraded one level for risk of bias (evidence accounting for most of the weight in the meta‐analysis was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for inconsistency (> 40% heterogeneity); one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies). e Downgraded one level for risk of bias (evidence accounting for > 30% of the weight in the meta‐analysis was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for inconsistency (> 40% heterogeneity); one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies). f Downgraded one level for risk of bias (evidence accounting for much of the weight in the meta‐analysis was from studies at high risk of bias); one level for publication bias (results missing from included studies). g Downgraded two levels for risk of bias (we judged that more than 60% of the evidence was at high risk of bias); one level for imprecision (evidence is from 1689 participants); and one level for publication bias (outcome non‐reporting bias: there is the potential for missing evidence). Background Rising levels of overweight and obesity have become a major global public health challenge [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ]. The causes are complex [ 5 ]. The 2007 Foresight report – 'Tackling Obesities: Future Choices', a landmark report published by the UK Government Office for Science – mapped over 100 interconnected factors, all of which contribute to the population prevalence of obesity [ 6 , 7 ]. These factors include macroeconomic drivers, biological factors, food supply and production, media, health care, the built environment, transport and recreation, technology, early life experiences, and education [ 6 , 7 ]. These factors operate differently in different people, and partially explain inequalities in childhood obesity. A good example is the relative cost of healthy food, such as fruits and vegetables, which may be prohibitive for families on low incomes [ 8 ]. Although the degree to which some factors contribute to obesity has changed since the Foresight report (such as the role of technology and the impact of the COVID‐19 pandemic), the core policy challenge of addressing complex causality remains unchanged [ 9 , 10 ]. Obesity prevalence is inextricably linked to the degree of social inequality: being in lower social strata is associated with a higher risk of obesity, including in children, in most high‐income countries [ 11 , 12 ]. Drawing on data from older age groups, from a large UK cohort study, body mass trends during childhood have been associated with local area deprivation, even when controlling for family socioeconomic circumstances [ 13 ]. In low‐income countries, the relationship is variable between countries. For example, in an analysis of obesity prevalence by socioeconomic status in 13 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, the largest gap was observed in Honduras among women (22%), and in Peru among men (22%), compared with a 4% gap among women in Brazil and 3% gap among men in Argentina [ 14 , 15 ]. It is therefore critical that, in preventing obesity, we also reduce the associated gap in health inequalities, ensuring that interventions do not inadvertently favour more socioeconomically advantaged people and groups. McNulty and colleagues suggest that the preferred approach to addressing health inequalities is to focus exclusively on reducing population‐level health disparities [ 16 ]. Where interventions are universal (i.e. target the whole population), it is important to assess whether their effectiveness varies by level of deprivation/disadvantage. Equally, there is a need to understand how to minimise obesity in more affluent groups in low‐income countries. The current evidence base offers limited guidance for developing effective obesity prevention strategies and selecting appropriate public health interventions, whether for the general population or those at highest risk [ 17 ]. Understanding the broader system that influences obesity – described in the Foresight report [ 6 ] – allows us to identify reasonable targets for intervention development. Some of these targets are 'upstream' (e.g. policy), some 'downstream' (e.g. individual‐level education), and some are more modifiable than others. Downstream interventions rely on individuals (i.e. parents and childcare staff) actively making a choice to provide a healthier diet or a more active lifestyle for young children, and being both willing and able to make these changes. Upstream interventions change policy or the environment in which the child lives (home, childcare settings, the wider environment), which makes consuming a healthy diet and being physically active the easy choice (sometimes the only choice). Examples include mandatory food standards, guidance on physical education for childcare provision, policies around the marketing of foods with high levels of fat, salt, or sugar which are targeted at children (including in supermarkets), town planning policies on mobile food and beverage vans close to childcare settings, and the number and locations of takeaway restaurants. There is evidence that downstream interventions are more likely to result in intervention‐generated inequalities [ 18 , 19 ]. Experts have argued, in relation to Chapter 2 of the Childhood Obesity Plan for England [ 20 ], that the main focus of interventions relies on self‐regulation at an individual level (downstream interventions), and that an equal focus on upstream interventions is also required if a step change in tackling childhood obesity is to be realised [ 21 , 22 ]. The important point to note is that the most successful approach to tackling childhood obesity is to develop and implement both upstream and downstream interventions. The World Health Organization (WHO) Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity states that progress in tackling childhood obesity has been slow and inconsistent [ 1 , 2 ]. It argues that obesity prevention and treatment require a whole‐of‐government approach, in which policies across all sectors systematically take health into account, avoid harmful health impacts, and so improve population health and health equity [ 1 , 2 ]. Indeed, it is now acknowledged that tackling obesity requires a 'whole systems' approach [ 23 ], and policy initiatives across government departments that are joined up [ 24 ]. Description of the condition 'Overweight' and 'obesity' are terms used to describe an excess of adiposity (or fatness) above the ideal for good health. Obesity results from a sustained positive energy imbalance. A variety of genetic, behavioural, cultural, environmental, and economic factors have been implicated in its development [ 7 , 25 ]. The interplay of these factors is complex and has been the focus of considerable research. Body mass index (BMI) is the most commonly used measure for assessing adiposity. It is calculated by dividing a person's weight (in kg) by their height (in m 2 ). Researchers and clinicians have differing ways of measuring the change in adiposity over time (i.e. BMI, BMI z‐score (zBMI), BMI percentile), and expert opinion is mixed regarding the preferential use of the different measures [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 ], including how best to assess changes in children's adiposity. There is no consistent application of these measures by content experts, which makes it difficult to compare randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that have used different measures and weight outcomes. Most trials included in this Cochrane review reported their results using BMI and zBMI. Global evidence suggests that the prevalence of childhood overweight and obesity began to rise in the late 1980s [ 30 ]. By 2010, 43 million children under five years of age were categorised as having overweight or obesity, with approximately 35 million living in low‐ and middle‐income countries [ 31 ]. Internationally, childhood obesity rates continue to rise in some countries (e.g. Mexico, India, China, Canada), although there is evidence of a slowing of this increase or a plateauing in some age groups in some countries [ 1 , 2 ]. The WHO Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity found that childhood obesity, including in young children, is reaching alarming proportions in many countries and poses an urgent, serious challenge [ 1 , 2 ]. The Sustainable Development Goals, set by the United Nations in 2015, also identify prevention and control of non‐communicable diseases, including obesity, as core priorities [ 32 ]. Children living with obesity have poorer psychological well‐being and elevated levels of a number of cardiometabolic risk factors [ 5 , 33 ]. Obesity comorbidities, including high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, and insulin insensitivity, are being observed at an increasingly early age [ 4 , 5 , 34 ]. Childhood obesity may cause musculoskeletal problems, obstructive sleep apnoea, asthma, and a number of psychological issues [ 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 ]. A recent analysis revealed that as many as one in three children with obesity may experience depression [ 4 ]. Childhood obesity is associated with type 2 diabetes and heart disease in adulthood, and middle‐age mortality [ 39 , 40 ]. Obesity tracks through to adulthood [ 41 ], strengthening the case for primary prevention. Adult obesity is associated with increased risks for heart disease, stroke, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, osteoarthritis, and some cancers [ 42 , 43 ]. Estimates of the economic impact of obesity (adult and child) as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) range from 0.13% in Thailand [ 44 ], to 9.3% in the USA [ 45 ]. However, the methods used to estimate these costs vary between studies, and most studies use a health system perspective rather than a societal perspective. Okunogbe and colleagues estimated obesity costs of between 0.8% and 2.4% of GDP in 2019 in the eight countries in their study (Australia, Brazil, India, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, and Thailand) [ 46 ]. They projected rising obesity costs as a percentage of GDP over time, estimated to reach 2.4% of GDP in Spain and up to 4.9% in Thailand by 2060. They concluded that the economic impacts of obesity are substantial, and of similar magnitude in low‐, middle‐, and high‐income countries. A separate projection for England reports that halving childhood obesity by 2030 could save the National Health Service 37,000 million pounds sterling (GBP) and wider society GBP 202,000 million [ 47 ]. Primary preventive efforts are likely to have optimal effects – including the potential for long‐term cost‐effectiveness [ 48 ] – if they start in early childhood (two to four years old), with parental support and involvement [ 49 ]. Meaningful parent engagement and parental role modelling appear to be key factors in the effectiveness of interventions for young children [ 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ]. A recent review recommends allocating resources to help vulnerable families access support and prevent childhood obesity [ 53 ]. In addition to parents, early childhood care providers are critical influences in the health behaviours of young children. Most preschool children (~87%) in high‐income countries are enrolled in some form of early childhood education [ 54 ], with rates of childcare attendance also increasing in low‐ and middle‐ income countries [ 55 ]. These environments play an influential role in the health behaviours of young children [ 2 ]. For example, engagement in healthy movement in these settings is associated with key developmental outcomes (i.e. psychosocial health) [ 56 ]. Early childhood education and care services include settings such as childcare, preschools, nurseries, and kindergartens, prior to attending compulsory schooling. In the review, we refer to these settings collectively as ‘childcare’. The time span from age two to beginning primary education is crucial for obesity‐prevention interventions [ 57 , 58 ], as dietary, physical activity, sedentary, and sleep habits and behaviours are being established. Lifestyle modification interventions to improve dietary quality, increase physical activity levels, reduce sedentary behaviours, and optimise sleep duration and quality – often using behaviour‐changing techniques and involving parents, carers, or both – are the mainstay of downstream (individual‐level) interventions in young children. By intervening at such an early age, it may be possible to prevent obesity levels continuing to rise for future generations and is crucial to reducing health inequalities [ 59 , 60 ]. Interventions targeting children even younger than two years old may be valuable, but this issue is beyond the scope of this review and is captured in additional ongoing work [ 61 ]. Much attention has been paid to the potential for negative unintended consequences of obesity‐prevention interventions. Whilst the risk of inducing or worsening eating disorders/disordered eating as part of an obesity‐prevention intervention remains relatively understudied, when this does occur, there is evidence that results can be severe [ 62 ]. The shared aetiology of obesity and eating disorders has implications for the design of interventions to prevent childhood obesity. Researchers in both fields have proposed using an integrated approach to prevention that addresses the spectrum of weight‐related disorders within interventions, with preliminary evidence in older children that this approach may be effective [ 63 ]. Identifying risk factors shared by these weight‐related disorders is essential to developing effective prevention interventions [ 64 ]. In addition, researchers argue that the messaging of interventions throughout childhood should promote establishing a healthy diet and enjoyable healthy activity behaviour, rather than focus solely on these behaviours as a means to reduce weight or prevent weight gain [ 65 ]. Description of the intervention and how it might work Interventions that aim to prevent childhood obesity seek to maintain an energy balance that is ideal for the healthy growth and development of the child. All such interventions work by limiting the amount of energy (calories) consumed, increasing the amount of energy expended (which includes basal metabolic rate, physical activity and other activity, including sleep, and energy required for child growth), or both limiting the amount of energy consumed and increasing the amount of energy expended. If energy consumed exceeds energy expenditure, excess body fat will accumulate. If sustained energy expenditure (normal metabolic demands plus cost of growth) exceeds energy consumed, the child may become malnourished. A severe energy deficit over a prolonged period in childhood, particularly during rapid periods of growth such as during early childhood, may have serious negative consequences for growth and development, and these effects are potentially irreversible. Balancing short‐term effectiveness with a safer, more moderate, and sustained energy deficit remains a key public health challenge in childhood obesity prevention [ 66 ]. The safest and most reliable way to ensure an ideal energy balance in growing children is for children to eat a healthy diet (low in saturated and trans‐fats and sugar) and be physically active. Most countries have age‐specific recommendations for daily food and drink intakes, and physical activity levels. Most interventions for young children that include a diet component promote a reduction in fat and added sugar intake (e.g. Fisher 2019 [ 67 ]), which sometimes includes limiting sugar‐sweetened beverage intake (e.g. Nezami 2017 [ 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 ]). Interventions for young children that include an activity component promote active play, a reduction in sedentary behaviour and screen time, or a combination of these. Examples include ensuring there are physical activity sessions during childcare (e.g. Fitzgibbon 2005 [ 72 , 73 , 74 ]), and strategies to limit the amount of time a child spends using a screen‐based device (e.g. Dennison 2004 [ 75 ]). Why it is important to do this review Childhood obesity has emerged as a pressing public health concern, influenced by various socioeconomic factors, including childhood inequalities. Governments worldwide are being urged to take action to prevent childhood obesity and address its underlying determinants. The burden of childhood obesity – and especially its associated inequalities – worsened in most countries during the COVID‐19 pandemic [ 76 ]. Early indications in a number of countries show that rising levels of childhood obesity [ https://www.worldobesity.org/ ] have also increased health inequalities. In some countries, particularly low‐income countries, the double burden of malnutrition (obesity and undernutrition) rose sharply during the pandemic [ 77 , 78 ]. As public health leaders worldwide develop and implement COVID‐19 recovery strategies, the need for scalable, feasible, and cost‐effective interventions to prevent childhood obesity has become more urgent than ever. These interventions should then feed into a broader strategy that includes upstream interventions. Research in this field has expanded considerably since 2015, particularly in the evidence base for early childhood interventions. This review provides a rigorous synthesis of evidence from RCTs in obesity prevention in children, most of which focus on individual‐level interventions [ 79 ]. Where possible, the totality of the evidence base should also capture studies that evaluate the effectiveness of upstream interventions, mindful of the fact that these types of interventions are not commonly assessed in randomised controlled trials because of the design challenges at scale. This review is one of a suite of three reviews addressing interventions for preventing obesity in children, focusing on different age groups up to 18 years [ 80 , 81 ]. These reviews replace and update a 2019 Cochrane review by Brown and colleagues which addressed interventions for preventing obesity in children from birth to 18 years [ 82 ]. Objectives Primary objectives To assess the effects of interventions that aimed to prevent obesity in children aged two to four years by changing dietary intake or activity levels, or both, on body mass index (BMI), BMI z‐score (zBMI), BMI percentile, and serious adverse events. Secondary objectives To collect information to explore if, how, and why the effectiveness of interventions on BMI/ zBMI / BMI percentile varies depending on factors related to health inequity, using the PROGRESS factors [ 83 ]. Place of residence Race/ethnicity/culture/language Occupation Gender/sex Religion Education Socioeconomic status Social capital To collect information about the costs of interventions to inform economic analyses. Methods This is one of a suite of three 'sister' reviews addressing interventions for preventing obesity in children, focusing on different age groups up to 18 years [ 80 , 81 ]. These three reviews replace and update a 2019 Cochrane review by Brown and colleagues which addressed interventions for preventing obesity in children from birth to 18 years [ 82 ]. Differences between protocol and review We amended the author team with new members to reflect their contributions to this review. We added 'BMI percentile' as an outcome as we found studies that only reported BMI expressed as a percentile. We also conducted risk of bias assessments for this outcome. We did not conduct subgroup analyses for sex or income status of country, as there were insufficient data to warrant these analyses. We did not conduct sensitivity analysis to address the impact of using self‐reported BMI due to insufficient data. We conducted a sensitivity analysis to determine whether excluding studies that classified children as being at 'higher risk' of obesity incurred any differences in results. This was a post hoc addition to what was reported in our protocol [ 84 ], driven by a substantial number of included studies with BMI status inclusion criteria for children, parents, or both. Criteria for considering studies for this review Types of studies We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that: were individually‐randomised, or cluster‐randomised with at least three clusters per intervention arm. We included only the first period of any trials with a cross‐over design (due to concerns about carry‐over effects); measured height and weight at baseline and end of intervention (including parent‐ or carer‐reported measurements); and included an active intervention period of any duration, provided that the studies reported follow‐up outcome data at a minimum of 12 weeks from baseline (interventions shorter than 12 weeks are less likely to result in sustainable changes in weight status). We excluded studies published before 1990, since global evidence suggests that the prevalence of overweight and obesity in children started to rise at the end of the 1980s [ 30 , 31 ]. Given the time lag between the conception, funding, and completion of RCTs, we considered a 1990 publication date as a pragmatic and reasonable starting point for the literature in the area. We also excluded quasi‐randomised studies, defined as studies that did not use formal randomisation. We included study reports published in any language. Types of participants We included children with a mean age of two years and above, but less than five years, at baseline. We applied this rule if an age‐based subset of children from a trial including a wide range of ages was reported separately and fulfilled this criterion. We considered studies to include eligible children if they: targeted children in the general population; or included children who were part of a family group receiving the intervention, as long as stratified outcome data for children aged two to four years were reported separately; or targeted children who were ‘at risk’ of overweight or obesity; for example, because a parent was living with overweight or obesity; or targeted children who were from specific areas (e.g. of high deprivation) or settings (e.g. religious settings) where the population was known to have relatively low levels of physical activity, high levels of energy intake, high levels of obesity, or a combination of these factors. Reflecting a public health approach that recognises the range of weights within the general population, we included studies that enrolled children with overweight or obesity. However, we excluded: studies that aimed to treat overweight and obesity. Thus, for example, we excluded studies that recruited only children with overweight or obesity at baseline, because we considered these studies to be focused on treatment rather than prevention; studies that evaluated interventions specifically designed for children with critical illnesses or severe comorbidities. Types of interventions Eligible interventions were those whose main aim was changing at least one of the following factors to help prevent obesity in young children: dietary intake; physical activity; sedentary behaviour; sleep; play; structured exercise. Examples of eligible interventions include the following: interventions that alter the food environment within a childcare setting to make it easier to choose healthier food items; interventions that provide opportunities for children to do more physical activity in childcare settings; interventions that educate parents/carers and childcare staff about how to provide a healthier diet and more physical activity opportunities for young children; digital interventions accessed by parents on smartphones that deliver weekly educational content about the nutritional value of certain food types. For the avoidance of doubt, interventions that primarily aimed to improve individual‐level behaviours for motor development, fitness, or sporting ability (e.g. focused on strength and sport‐specific fitness training), and those that aimed to promote a healthy weight by assessing the BMI of the child and then informing parents that the child has overweight or obesity, are not included in this review. Settings We included interventions in any setting, including the home, childcare and healthcare settings, and the wider community. We also included digital interventions. There is no single agreed definition of digital intervention; we operationalised it here as an intervention that employs software, hardware, and/or digital services (e.g. mobile health apps, wearable devices, telehealth and telemedicine, and personalised medicine) to help prevent childhood obesity. Comparators We included studies that compared an eligible intervention with: a non‐intervention control group (sometimes termed 'usual care'); a non‐energy‐balance‐related intervention (e.g. control group received a safety course); another eligible intervention (i.e. head‐to‐head comparisons). Outcome measures Critical outcomes Our primary outcomes are: unstandardised BMI, derived from the weight and height measurements of the children at least 12 weeks after randomisation; zBMI (standardised BMI), derived from the weight and height measurements of the children at least 12 weeks after randomisation and standardised to age‐specific local or national tables for BMI; BMI percentile, derived from the weight and height measurements of the children at least 12 weeks after randomisation and standardised to age‐specific local or national tables for BMI; Serious adverse events, defined as eating disorders, body dysmorphia disorder, body image disturbance, or injuries sufficient to seek medical attention. We included studies if they planned (e.g. stated in the protocol or trial register entry) to measure BMI, zBMI, or BMI percentile at baseline and at a minimum of 12 weeks from baseline. We included such studies regardless of whether they reported these results in study publications. We consider zBMI to be more useful than BMI as a measure of body fat in children. For completeness, we also present results for BMI because zBMI is not always reported, particularly in older studies. As noted above, we added 'BMI percentile' as an outcome after writing the protocol, as we found studies that only reported BMI expressed as a percentile. We included zBMI, BMI, and BMI percentile results taken from either measured or parent/carer‐reported weight and height data. A recent re‐analysis of data for two‐year‐old children from an Australian trial conducted in 2019 found that reported BMI and BMI z‐scores were both 0.2 units lower than measured BMI and BMI z‐scores, but the difference was not statistically significant [ 85 ]. In a study which included four‐year‐old children [ 86 ], maternal misreporting was found to be more prevalent for boys than girls, and for children with a low socioeconomic status than those with a high socioeconomic status. We planned to include studies that employed parent/carer‐reported height and weight measures, as we did not want to exclude studies on this basis if otherwise relevant. We identified only one study that assessed height and weight this way, and thus did not conduct a sensitivity analysis to address the impact of using parent/carer‐reported data. Time points We collected data from all reported post‐intervention time points at least 12 weeks from baseline. We grouped data for analysis into short‐ (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months), medium‐ (9 months from baseline to < 15 months), and long‐term (15 months or longer) time periods. Important outcomes Equity Given that public health policy‐makers with responsibility for preventing obesity in children aged two to four are particularly interested in knowing whether interventions produce intervention‐generated inequalities [ 87 ], we collected data (where reported) on the differential effects of interventions on BMI, zBMI, and BMI percentile by PROGRESS factor [ 83 ]. See also https://methods.cochrane.org/equity/projects/evidence-equity/progress-plus . Search methods for identification of studies The search methods for this review in children aged two to four build on and update the literature searches and record‐screening activities undertaken for the 2019 Cochrane review by Brown and colleagues mentioned above [ 82 ]. Because our eligibility criteria coincide with those of the Brown review, we updated but did not repeat their earlier searches. We re‐assessed the included, ongoing and 'awaiting classification' studies identified in the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ]. Electronic searches For this review, and following the methods used in the sister reviews [ 80 , 81 ], we obtained studies from several electronic database searches, including updated searches from collaborators, an appended search of the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) in the Cochrane Library, education databases, and grey literature ( Supplementary material 1 ), as described below. Unlike the two sister reviews, we did not search an interim (non‐Cochrane) update of the Brown 2019 review by Hodder and colleagues, published in 2022 [ 88 ], because it was restricted to children aged six to 18. New databases and grey literature searches Database searches (2018 to October 2022) We searched the following databases on 7 October 2022 to update previous searches, as mentioned above: CENTRAL; 2022, Issue 10, in the Cochrane Library (from inception to 7 October 2022); MEDLINE Ovid (from 1990 to 7 October 2022); Embase Ovid (from 1990 to 7 October 2022); PsycINFO Ovid (from 1990 to 7 October 2022). Our search strategies are illustrated in Supplementary material 1 . In addition, on 7 October 2022, we searched the following education databases from 1990 onwards, to extend our reach beyond that in the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ] (for search strategies please see Supplementary material 1 ): Australian Education Index (AEI) ProQuest (1990 to 7 October 2022); British Education Index (BEI) EBSCOhost (1990 to 7 October 2022); Education Resources Information Center (ERIC) EBSCOhost (1990 to 7 October 2022). The appended search of CENTRAL (see Supplementary material 1 for search strategies) aimed to capture search terms that were not previously included in the search conducted for the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ]. These new search terms included: marketing; beverages and sweetening agents; food labelling; parental interventions; electronic apps and web‐based interventions. The decision to limit the appended search to CENTRAL was pragmatic, as Cochrane’s Centralised Search Service (CSS) uses a highly efficient search strategy to capture reports of RCTs from MEDLINE and Embase (for inclusion in CENTRAL) [ 89 ]. International trial registers (1990 to October 2022) We searched two international trial registers: ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) via CENTRAL in the Cochrane Library. See Supplementary material 1 . Grey literature (1990 to December 2022) We restricted the search for grey literature to theses and dissertations and ran a pragmatic search for PhD theses (1990 onwards) on the following databases (see Supplementary material 1 for search strategies): Proquest Dissertations & Theses Global (PQDT Global), Clarivate (search.proquest.com/pqdtglobal/dissertations/) (1990 to 14 December 2022); Electronic Theses Online Service (EThOS), the British Library (ethos.bl.uk/Home.do) (1990 to 14 December 2022). Search updates (February 2023) From September 2022 to 7 February 2023, we ran automated weekly searches for new studies or additional reports of those already included and screened the results. This search comprised a multi‐file search of Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, and PsycINFO together with a search of CENTRAL in the Cochrane Library (see Supplementary material 1 ). This search supersedes all previous searches of the four main bibliographic databases (CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO) as it is far more sensitive, based on terms for condition and population only (plus an RCT filter) (no terms for intervention). Searches of the education databases were manually updated on 7 October 2022. In databases where it was possible and appropriate, we used study design filters for randomised trials. In MEDLINE, we used a modified version of the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity‐ and precision‐maximising version (2008 revision) [ 90 ]. The date of the last search for this review was 7 February 2023 because, except for the trial registers, grey literature and education databases, this is the latest date that all other databases were searched. Retractions and corrigenda (February 2023) We checked for additional publications and any post‐publication amendments for the included studies to identify any expressions of concern, errata, corrigenda, and retractions. Searching other resources We scanned the references of the included study reports to identify additional relevant records. We scanned the references of three non‐Cochrane reviews [ 91 ; 92 ; 93 ], all of which had a similar aim to this review. We also contacted authors of studies included in the review to identify potentially unpublished or ongoing studies. Data collection and analysis We report here only the methods we used for this review. Readers should refer to our Cochrane protocol [ 84 ] and the 'Differences between protocol and review' section above for pre‐planned but unused methods. Selection of studies Two review authors (SMP, CDS) screened titles and abstracts independently and in duplicate using Covidence [ 94 ]. We retrieved full‐text articles of records that potentially met the eligibility criteria and screened these independently and in duplicate. We resolved any uncertainty or differences in opinion through discussion without the need for escalation to a third author. We recorded the selection process in a PRISMA diagram [ 95 ]. Data extraction and management We modified a data collection form for study characteristics and outcome data used in the updated sister reviews of interventions to prevent obesity in older children [ 80 , 81 ], to ensure relevance for young children. Two review authors (of SMP, FHB, KR, CY, RR, YG, KO'B, RH, CDS) extracted study characteristics and numerical data independently and in duplicate from each of the included studies. All forms were then cross‐checked and validated (by SMP or CDS). One review author (YG) translated studies published in Chinese. We extracted the study characteristics listed in Supplementary material 9 . Where we were not able to extract desired statistics directly (e.g. standard deviations of BMI), we computed or estimated these according to the methods described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [ 96 ], using the calculator function in Review Manager (RevMan) [ 97 ]. We examined serious adverse events only in the studies meeting the main eligibility criteria. We did not perform an additional search focusing on serious adverse events. Risk of bias assessment in included studies We assessed the risk of bias for the outcomes BMI, zBMI, and BMI percentile using the Cochrane risk of bias 2 (RoB) 2 tool [ 98 ]. RoB 2 is structured into five domains of bias: bias arising from the randomisation process; bias due to deviations from intended interventions; bias due to missing outcome data; bias in measurement of the outcome; and bias in selection of the reported result. For cluster‐RCTs, we used the version of the RoB 2 tool designed for studies using cluster randomisation [ 99 ], which has an additional domain: bias arising from the identification or recruitment of participants into clusters. We arrived at judgements about risk of bias using the algorithms in the tool, based on answers we gave to the relevant signalling questions. Judgements can be 'Low' or 'High' risk of bias, or can be expressed as 'Some concerns'. All assessments were managed using the RoB 2 Excel tool (available online via https://www.riskofbias.info/welcome/rob-2-0-tool/current-version-of-rob-2) . Our RoB 2 assessments with consensus responses can be found in Figshare (doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27850320). We assessed risk of bias for the effect of assignment to the intervention at baseline (i.e. the 'intention‐to‐treat' (ITT) effect) for BMI, zBMI score, and BMI percentile at short‐ (baseline to < 9 months), medium‐ (9 months from baseline to < 15 months), and long‐term (15 months or more) follow‐up, and only for specific results that contributed to meta‐analyses. For studies with multiple intervention arms, we assessed the risk of bias for each pairwise comparison contributing to the meta‐analyses. Pairs of review authors (of SMP, HS, VC, FS) independently assessed newly identified studies using the RoB 2 tool. Outcome results included in the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ] were assessed for risk of bias by two independent authors using the original Cochrane risk of bias tool (RoB 1) [ 100 ]. We transformed these RoB 1 assessments into RoB 2 assessments as follows: one author (SMP or THMM) first completed an independent RoB 2 assessment (blinded to the RoB 1 assessment), and then compared it to the previous RoB 1 assessment. Differences or uncertainties were resolved through discussion with another author (HS). None of the review authors who performed risk of bias assessment were the authors of any included studies. To draw an overall conclusion about the risk of bias in a synthesised result across included studies, we used the methods set out in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [ 101 ]. We used our overall risk of bias assessment for each result in the review to inform our GRADE assessment (see Certainty of the evidence assessment ) and for sensitivity analysis (see Sensitivity analysis ). Measures of treatment effect We measured intervention effects on BMI, zBMI score, and BMI percentile using an unstandardised mean difference (MD) with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) between intervention groups. For serious adverse events, a dichotomous outcome, we intended to measure intervention effects using risk ratios (RRs) with respective 95% CIs where possible. For all outcomes, we sought results that most closely followed the ITT principles. Unit of analysis issues In the primary analysis, we used values adjusted for clustering where possible and reported this in the footnotes of each meta‐analysis. We did not impute intra‐cluster correlation coefficients (ICC) for studies that did not use and/or report ICCs. We subsequently examined each cluster‐RCT to determine whether the analysis accounted for clustering prior to conducting a sensitivity analysis. We created an approximate analysis by inflating the standard error of the estimated intervention effect according to an estimated ‘design effect’ [ 102 ]. This required an estimate of the ICC, describing the relative variability within and between clusters. We performed a sensitivity analysis using a conservative ICC estimate of 0.04 (in line with [ 80 , 81 ]) to determine whether this imputation produced any substantive differences in overall outcomes. We provide details of the cluster adjustment methods, choice of ICC, and all values of standard errors used in the primary analysis, and those adjusted for the purposes of the sensitivity analysis, plus the data used to calculate these standard errors in supplementary data in Supplementary material 10 . In some instances, RCTs had two follow‐up data collection time points that would be included in the same meta‐analysis (e.g. 3‐ and 6‐month follow‐up time points, which both fall within our predefined short‐term time frame for meta‐analysis). For short‐ and medium‐term follow‐up, we chose the time point closest to the central point (6 months and 12 months, respectively). For long‐term follow‐up, we chose the last time point. For multi‐arm studies, we combined groups by pooling the means and standard deviations to create a single pairwise comparison to avoid unit‐of‐analysis issues with such studies, as outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Intervention [ 102 ]. Dealing with missing data We examined the extent of and reasons for missing data as part of the risk of bias assessment of each included RCT. We did not impute missing data and did not contact trial authors to obtain any missing data. Reporting bias assessment We assessed the risk of bias arising from (non)reporting bias and selective reporting bias using a preliminary version of ROB‐ME, a tool for assessing Risk Of Bias due to Missing Evidence in a synthesis (ROB‐ME) [ 103 ], which is based on the framework described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [ 104 ]. ROB‐ME is implemented in a similar fashion to the RoB 2 tool, with a series of signalling questions leading to a judgement about the risk of bias in the specific synthesised result being assessed. ROB‐ME is available at https://www.riskofbias.info/welcome/rob-me-tool . Synthesis methods We performed meta‐analyses of BMI, zBMI score, and BMI percentile using the generic inverse‐variance method with a random‐effects model [ 105 ], and method of moments estimate of between‐study variance. Our main comparisons are: dietary interventions versus no intervention/control; activity interventions (including those targeting physical activity, sedentary behaviour, sleep, and play) versus no intervention/control; interventions with both dietary and activity components versus no intervention/control. Though we were also interested in the following comparisons, there were no usable data available to conduct these analyses in this age group: interventions with both dietary and activity components versus dietary intervention alone; interventions with both dietary and activity components versus activity intervention alone; dietary interventions versus activity interventions. We analysed the mean differences described in Measures of treatment effect . We used data as reported in the original studies, provided footnotes to indicate whether these data had been adjusted for clustering, and gave preference to data adjusted for clustering over unadjusted data. We then conducted a sensitivity analysis to determine whether adjusting data for clustering would produce any material differences in the outcomes. All studies eligible for meta‐analysis were included in the analyses. If data could not be used in the meta‐analyses, we reported this narratively and supplemented the meta‐analyses by commenting on the potential impact of omitting studies from the meta‐analyses. Due to the diversity of measures used to define adverse events and the sparsity of data for this outcome, we tabulated information about serious adverse effects and summarised the results narratively. Investigation of heterogeneity and subgroup analysis We used the I 2 statistic to quantify the degree of inconsistency across results, supplemented by a P value from a test of homogeneity to measure the strength of evidence of statistical heterogeneity [ 105 ]. For each meta‐analysis, we report the results of the heterogeneity assessments (I 2 and P value) alongside the measure of treatment effect. We explored heterogeneity in the primary analyses by performing the following pre‐planned subgroup analyses on the outcomes of BMI, zBMI, and BMI percentile according to the following study‐level characteristics and participant‐level characteristics. Main setting of the intervention: we coded settings as 'childcare', 'childcare and home', 'home', or 'other'. The ‘other’ category included settings such as community or healthcare settings. Socioeconomic status: low versus mixed, based on categorisations as described by the trial authors. Duration of the intervention: this relates to the duration of the intervention itself rather than the time points at which outcomes were assessed. We coded durations as short (< 9 months), medium (9 months to < 15 months), and long (15 months or longer). We selected ‘main setting of the intervention’ for subgroup analysis because, given limited financial resources, public health policy‐makers and commissioners need to understand where best to target the implementation of interventions to prevent childhood obesity. We selected ‘socioeconomic status’ for subgroup analysis given the wealth of evidence which suggests that some public health interventions can result in intervention‐generated inequalities [ 106 ]. Finally, we selected ‘duration of intervention’ to assess the point at which the interventions resulted in the greatest effect size, in order to support public health policy‐makers in their decision regarding the best length of interventions to commission. We also planned subgroup analyses according to sex and income status of country [ 107 ]. However, too few studies presented subgroup analyses by sex and all but four studies were conducted in high‐income countries; as such, subgroup analyses were not feasible. Tests for subgroup differences were based on standard heterogeneity tests in RevMan [ 97 ], as described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [ 105 ]. A P value of 0.05 or lower was used to indicate a likely difference between subgroups. Equity‐related assessment We conducted a subgroup analysis based on socioeconomic status, to determine whether there were differences in the effectiveness of interventions when delivered to participants in low socioeconomic versus 'mixed' socioeconomic situations. Sensitivity analysis We performed sensitivity analyses to examine the robustness of our findings to inclusion of results assessed as being at high risk of bias. We investigated the impact of imputing ICCs in cluster‐RCTs, as described in Unit of analysis issues . We also performed sensitivity analyses to determine whether excluding studies that classified children as being at ‘higher risk’ of obesity produced any differences in results. As noted above, we made this post hoc addition because we found a substantial number of included studies with BMI status inclusion criteria for children, parents, or both. Certainty of the evidence assessment We prepared a summary of findings tables for each of our main comparisons using RevMan [ 97 ]: dietary intervention versus control, activity interventions versus control; dietary and activity interventions versus control. Each summary of findings table summarises the size and certainty of effects of the interventions for three critical outcomes: BMI, zBMI, and serious adverse events, at short‐, medium‐, and long‐term follow‐up (see Critical outcomes ). We based our assessments of evidence certainty on the five GRADE considerations: study limitations, inconsistency, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias (see Supplementary material 11 ), and we followed the methods described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [ 101 ] and the GRADE Handbook [ 108 ]. Two authors (SMP completed all, FS and THMM completed half each) worked independently to make GRADE judgements, resolving any disagreements by discussion. We documented and incorporated the GRADE judgements into our reporting of results for each outcome. Consumer involvement There was no consumer involvement in this review. Results Description of studies Results of the search Our study selection process is summarised in the PRISMA flowchart reported in Figure 1 . 1 PRISMA study selection flow diagram *Other sources: Three existing non‐Cochrane reviews [ 91 , 92 , 93 ]. From the studies included (as included, awaiting assessment, or ongoing studies) in the previous version of this review [ 82 ], we identified 76 potentially age‐relevant studies (110 references). Of these, we included 46 studies (76 references), excluded 25 studies (28 references), and categorised five studies (six references) as ongoing. From our new searches, we identified 3202 records from our electronic searches and five from searching other sources. After deduplication, two review authors screened 2817 records at the title‐and‐abstract screening stage, and excluded 2564 irrelevant records. We retrieved 253 full‐text reports for eligibility assessment, of which we excluded 107 (98 studies), with reasons given. We included 21 studies (77 references), listed four (10 references) as awaiting classification, and identified 41 studies (59 references) as ongoing. Together with the 46 included studies and five ongoing studies carried over from the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ], this review includes a total of 67 studies, with four studies awaiting classification and 46 ongoing. See Supplementary material 2 ; Supplementary material 3 ; Supplementary material 4 ; Supplementary material 5 . The 67 included studies in this review involved 36,601 participants, published in 153 reports (Adamo 2017 [ 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 ]; Alkon 2014 [ 113 ]; Altarrah 2018 [ 114 ]; Barber 2016 [ 115 ]; Barkin 2012 [ 116 , 117 ]; Barkin 2018 [ 118 , 119 , 120 ]; Bellows 2013 [ 121 , 122 ]; Birken 2012 [ 123 ]; Bonis 2014 [ 124 ]; Bonvin 2013 [ 125 ]; Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 [ 126 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 ]; Davis 2016 [ 131 , 132 ]; De Bock 2012 [ 133 , 134 ]; Dennison 2004; Derwig 2021 [ 135 , 136 , 137 ]; Feng 2004 [ 138 ]; Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 [ 139 ]; Fisher 2019; Fitzgibbon 2005; Fitzgibbon 2006 [ 140 ]; Fitzgibbon 2011 [ 141 , 142 ]; French 2018 [ 143 , 144 , 145 , 146 ]; Gao 2019 [ 147 ]; Gato‐Moreno 2021 [ 148 ]; Goldfield 2016 [ 149 ]; Haines 2013 [ 150 , 151 ]; Haines 2016 [ 152 ]; Hammersley 2019 [ 153 , 154 , 155 , 156 ]; Hammersley 2021 [ 157 , 158 ]; Hawkins 2019 [ 159 ]; Heerman 2019 [ 160 , 161 , 162 ]; Hodgkinson 2019 [ 163 ]; Hughes 2021 [ 164 , 165 , 166 ]; Iaia 2017 [ 167 ]; Jouret 2009 [ 168 ]; Klein 2010 [ 169 ]; Kobel 2019 [ 170 , 171 , 172 ]; Linville (Study 1) 2020 [ 173 ]; Linville (Study 2) 2020 [ 174 ]; Lumeng 2017 [ 175 , 176 , 177 , 178 , 179 , 180 ]; Malden 2019 [ 181 , 182 , 183 , 184 , 185 ]; Manios 2022 [ 186 , 187 , 188 , 189 , 190 , 191 ]; Morgan 2022 [ 192 , 193 ]; Morshed 2018 [ 194 , 195 ]; Mo‐Suwan 1998 [ 196 , 197 ]; Natale 2017 [ 198 , 199 , 200 , 201 , 202 , 203 ]; Natale 2021 [ 204 , 205 , 206 , 207 ]; Nezami 2017; Olsen 2020 [ 208 , 209 , 210 , 211 , 212 , 213 , 214 , 215 , 216 , 217 , 218 ]; Ostbye 2012 [ 219 ]; Penalvo 2015 [ 220 , 221 , 222 ]; Reilly 2006 [ 223 , 224 ]; Roth 2015 [ 225 , 226 ]; Sherwood 2015 [ 227 ]; Skouteris 2016 [ 228 , 229 ]; Slusser 2012 [ 230 ]; Stookey 2017 [ 231 , 232 ]; Sun 2017 [ 233 ]; Swindle 2021 [ 234 , 235 ]; Tomayko 2016 [ 236 ]; Tomayko 2019 [ 237 , 238 , 239 , 240 ]; Vaughn 2021 [ 241 , 242 , 243 ]; Walton 2015 [ 244 , 245 ]; Ward 2020 [ 246 , 247 ]; Yilmaz 2015 [ 248 ]; Yoong 2020 [ 249 , 250 ]; Zask 2012 [ 251 , 252 ]). Of note, two separate studies are reported in one full‐text report: Linville (Study 1) 2020; Linville (Study 2) 2020. These studies, their trial registration numbers (TRNs) (where reported or relevant), and study status are listed alphabetically by study ID in Table 4 . 1 List of all studies (included, awaiting assessment, ongoing, and excluded) and their Trial Registration Number (TRN) where available Study ID TRN Status Abbott‐Shim 2003 [ 297 ] ACTRN12610000087055 (2010) [ 298 ] ACTRN12615001032549 (2015) [ 299 ] ACTRN12615001058561 (2015) [ 300 ] ACTRN12617001083381 (2017) [ 301 ] NR ACTRN12610000087055 ACTRN12615001032549 ACTRN12615001058561 ACTRN12617001083381 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Adamo 2017 ISRCTN94022291 1. Included Adebowale 2020 [ 302 , 303 ] NCT00892983 9. Excluded Alexandrou 2023 NCT04147039 2. Awaiting Alkon 2014 Altarrah 2018 NCT01921842 NCT02559076 1. Included 1. Included Armstrong 2019 [ 304 ] Bailey‐Davis 2022 [ 305 ] NCT03111264 NCT04406441 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing Barber 2016 Barkin 2012 Barkin 2018 ISRCTN54165860 NCT00808431 NCT01316653 1. Included 1. Included 1. Included Barnes 2020 [ 306 ] Beck 2017 [ 307 ] ACTRN12619001158156 NCT02257203 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Belanger 2016 [ 308 , 309 ] NCT02375490 3. Ongoing Bellows 2013 NCT01937481 1. Included Berkel 2020 [ 310 ] Berry 2011 [ 311 ] NCT04469816 NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Berry 2019 [ 312 ] Bersamin 2019 [ 313 ] NCT03866902 NCT03986632 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing Birken 2012 NCT00959309 1. Included Black 2013 [ 314 ] Black 2021 [ 315 ] Blaney 2010 [ 316 ] Blue Bird 2022 [ 317 ] NR NCT02615158 n/a NCT03251950 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Bonis 2014 NR 1. Included Bonuck 2016 [ 318 ] NCT03556462 9. Excluded Bonvin 2013 NCT00967460 1. Included Brophy‐Herb 2023 NCT02487251 2. Awaiting Bryant 2019 [ 319 ] Buscemi 2019 [ 320 ] NCT02675699 NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 NR 1. Included Carson 2015 [ 321 ] Costa 2019 [ 322 ] NR n/a 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Davis 2016 De Bock 2012 NCT00428805 NCT00987532 1. Included 1. Included Delisle Nystrom 2017 [ 323 , 324 , 325 , 326 , 327 ] NCT02021786 3. Ongoing Dennison 2004 Derwig 2021 NR NCT04260672 1. Included 1. Included Domínguez‐Muñoz 2021 [ 328 ] ACTRN12622000102774 3. Ongoing Ersino 2017 [ 329 ] Esquivel 2018 [ 330 ] Estradé 2021 [ 331 ] Faith 2021 [ 332 ] Fastring 2019 [ 333 ] NR NR NCT02803853 NCT01662557 NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Feng 2004 NR 1. Included Fernald 2009 [ 334 ] ISRCTN11833436 9. Excluded Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 Fisher 2019 Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 Fitzgibbon 2011 NCT02343341 NCT03646201 NR NR NCT00241878 1. Included 1. Included 1. Included 1. Included 1. Included Fleary 2022 [ 335 ] Flores‐Peña 2022 [ 336 ] Foster 2022 [ 337 ] Francis 2006 [ 338 ] NCT04252677 NR NCT03330743 n/a 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded French 2018 NCT01606891 1. Included Gago 2023 NCT03334669 2. Awaiting Gamboa Delgado 2014 [ 339 ] Gans 2022 [ 340 , 341 , 342 , 343 ] NR NCT02452645 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Gao 2019 Gato‐Moreno 2021 NR NR 1. Included 1. Included Ghabashi 2023 [ 344 ] NR 9. Excluded Gibson 2021 [ 345 , 346 , 347 ] Gillespie 2019 [ 348 , 349 ] ISRCTN16593038 ISRCTN13385965 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing Goldfield 2016 NCT02293278 1. Included Gorin 2014 [ 350 ] NCT01973153 3. Ongoing Ha 2021 [ 351 ] ACTRN12618001524280 9. Excluded Haines 2013 Haines 2016 NCT01565161 NCT02222571 1. Included 1. Included Haines 2018 [ 352 , 353 , 354 , 355 ] Haire‐Joshu 2008 [ 356 ] Hajizadeh 2017 [ 357 ] NCT02223234 NR NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Hammersley 2019 Hammersley 2021 ANZCTR12616000119493 ACTRN12619000396123 1. Included 1. Included Hart 2019 [ 358 , 359 ] ACTRN12615000354583 3. Ongoing Hawkins 2019 NCT02160847 1. Included He 2020 [ 360 ] NR 9. Excluded Heerman 2019 Hodgkinson 2019 NCT03141151 ISRCTN22620137 1. Included 1. Included Hollar 2015 [ 361 ] NR 3. Ongoing Hughes 2021 NCT01513343 1. Included Hughes 2023 [ 362 ] NCT03170700 9. Excluded Huye 2020 [ 363 ] NR 3. Ongoing Iaia 2017 ACTRN12614000850673 1. Included Jastreboff 2018 [ 364 ] NCT01974102 9. Excluded Jouret 2009 NR 1. Included Karssen 2021 [ 365 ] NL7371 3. Ongoing Kim 2019 [ 366 ] NR 9. Excluded Kipping 2022 [ 367 , 368 , 369 ] ISRCTN16287377 3. Ongoing Klein 2010 NR 1. Included Knowlden 2018 [ 370 , 371 ] NR 9. Excluded Kobel 2019 DRKS00010089 1. Included Lanigan 2013 [ 372 ] Lee 2019 [ 373 , 374 , 375 ] NCT00675662 (not NCT0067566 as reported in paper) NCT03261492 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing Lerner‐Geva 2015 [ 376 ] Ling 2018 [ 377 , 378 ] NR NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Linville (Study 1) 2020 Linville (Study 2) 2020 NR NR 1. Included 1. Included Loes 2018 [ 379 ] NR 3. Ongoing Lumeng 2017 Malden 2019 Manios 2022 NCT01398358 ISRCTN12831555 NCT02116296 1. Included 1. Included 1. Included Mannino 2019 [ 380 ] Marks 2018 [ 381 ] Marquis 2018 [ 382 ] Marsh 2019 [ 383 , 384 ] Martíncrespo‐Blanco 2022 [ 385 ] Martínez‐Andrade 2014 [ 386 ] Martínez‐Vizcaino 2015 [ 387 , 388 ] Mathew 2020 [ 389 ] Mazzucca 2017 [ 390 ] McGowan 2020 [ 391 ] Mehdizadeh 2018 [ 392 ] Ming 2013 [ 393 ] NR n/a NCT01985243 ACTRN12618000823279 NCT04301180 NCT01539070 NCT01971840 NCT01845545 NR [not NCT02851030 as reported in paper] n/a IRCT2016041927475N1 ChiCTR2000029333 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Morgan 2022 ACTRN12619000105145 1. Included Morris 2018 [ 394 ] Morse 2017 [ 395 ] NR NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Morshed 2018 Mo‐Suwan 1998 NCT01567033 NR 1. Included 1. Included Naschold 2022 [ 396 ] Natale 2014 NCT02672748 NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Natale 2017 Natale 2021 NCT01722032 NCT02697565 1. Included 1. Included Natale 2023 [ 397 ] NCT05445518 9. Excluded NCT01070251 (2010) [ 398 ] NCT01070251 3. Ongoing NCT01216306 (2010) [ 399 ] NCT01216306 9. Excluded NCT01679938 (2012) [ 400 , 401 ] NCT01819987 (2013) [ 402 ] NCT01679938 NCT01819987 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing NCT01845480 (2013) [ 403 ] NCT02200484 (2014) [ 404 ] NCT02681874 (2016) [ 405 ] NCT02799433 (2016) [ 406 ] NCT01845480 NCT02200484 NCT02681874 NCT02799433 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded NCT03394326 (2018) [ 407 ] NCT03405246 (2018) [ 408 ] NCT03575884 (2018) [ 409 ] NCT03601299 (2018) [ 410 ] NCT03394326 NCT03405246 NCT03575884 NCT03601299 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing NCT03668678 (2018) [ 411 ] NCT03713840 (2018) [ 412 ] NCT03668678 NCT03713840 9. Excluded 9. Excluded NCT03817021 (2019) [ 413 ] NCT03817021 3. Ongoing NCT03861208 (2019) [ 414 ] NCT03885518 (2019) [ 415 ] NCT03861208 NCT03885518 9. Excluded 9. Excluded NCT03950453 (2019) [ 416 ] NCT03950453 3. Ongoing NCT03957148 (2019) [ 417 ] NCT03957148 9. Excluded NCT03976089 (2019) [ 418 , 419 ] NCT03982511 (2019) [ 420 ] NCT04082247 (2019) [ 421 ] NCT04140032 (2019) [ 422 ] NCT03976089 NCT03982511 NCT04082247 NCT04140032 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing NCT04164277 (2019) [ 423 ] NCT04164277 9. Excluded NCT04261985 (2020) [ 424 ] NCT04261985 3. Ongoing NCT04362280 (2020) [ 425 ] NCT04552678 (2020) [ 426 ] NCT04754269 (2021) [ 427 ] NCT05020366 (2021) [ 428 ] NCT05050539 (2021) [ 429 ] NCT05094466 (2021) [ 430 ] NCT04362280 NCT04552678 NCT04754269 NCT05020366 NCT05050539 NCT05094466 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded NCT05106426 (2021) [ 431 ] NCT05112185 (2021) [ 432 ] NCT05106426 NCT05112185 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing NCT05159622 (2021) [ 433 ] NCT05285761 (2022) [ 434 ] NCT05328193 (2022) [ 435 ] NCT05159622 NCT05285761 NCT05328193 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded NCT05356338 (2022) [ 436 ] NCT05356338 3. Ongoing NCT05424471 (2022) [ 437 ] NCT05445193 (2022) [ 438 ] NCT05424471 NCT05445193 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Nezami 2017 NCT02098902 1. Included Novotny 2022 [ 439 ] O'Dwyer 2013 [ 440 ] Ogbuagu 2014 [ 441 ] NCT01881373 NR NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Okely 2020 [ 442 ] ACTRN12614000597695 3. Ongoing Olsen 2020 Ostbye 2012 NCT01583335 NCT00563264 1. Included 1. Included Parkinson 2015 [ 443 ] ISRCTN91136472 9. Excluded Penalvo 2015 NCT01579708 1. Included Persson 2020 [ 444 ] ISRCTN16991919 9. Excluded Pfeiffer 2013 [ 445 , 446 ] NCT01885325 3. Ongoing Poeta 2019 [ 447 ] Ponce‐Blandón 2020 [ 448 ] Puma 2005 [ 449 ] Quintiliani 2014 [ 450 ] n/a NR n/a NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Rae 2023 [ 451 ] NCT03219697 3. Ongoing Rathore 2022 [ 452 ] Ray 2020 [ 453 ] Razak 2018 [ 454 ] Razani 2016 [ 455 ] ACTRN12621001291875 ISRCTN57165350 ACTRN12616000347460 NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Reilly 2006 ISRCTN36363490 1. Included Rosario 2012 [ 456 ] NCT01397123 9. Excluded Roth 2015 NCT00623844 . 1. Included Rush 2016 [ 457 ] Salazar 2014 [ 458 ] ACTRN12610000132044 NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Salvy 2018 [ 459 ] NCT03433456 3. Ongoing Sanchez‐Lopez 2015 [ 460 ] NCT01971827 9. Excluded Sanchez‐Lopez 2019 [ 461 ] NCT03236363 3. Ongoing Sazawal 2010 [ 462 ] Seguin‐Fowler 2021 [ 463 ] Seward 2016 [ 464 ] Sharma 2015 [ 465 ] Shaw 2007 [ 466 ] NCT00255385 NCT02770196 NR n/a NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Sherwood 2015 NCT01080885 1. Included Skouteris 2014 [ 467 ] ACTRN12614000363684 9. Excluded Skouteris 2016 ACTRN12610000200088 1. Included Slining 2021 [ 468 ] N/A 9. Excluded Slusser 2012 NR 1. Included Smith 2015 [ 469 ] Smith 2018 [ 470 ] Smithers 2021 [ 471 ] NR NR (but similar to NCT04132245 and NCT00241878 ) ACTRN12611000111976 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Sobko 2016 [ 472 , 473 , 474 ] NCT02715544 3. Ongoing Stagnitti 2011 [ 475 ] Steele 2013 [ 476 ] Steenbock 2019 [ 477 ] n/a NR DRKS00011065 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Stookey 2017 ISRCTN18857356 1. Included Strauss 2011 [ 478 ] Strobel 2022 [ 479 ] NCT00336128 n/a 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Sun 2017 Swindle 2021 NCT01819987 NCT03075085 1. Included 1. Included Tandon 2019 [ 480 ] Taniguchi 2022 [ 481 ] Taverno Ross 2021 [ 482 ] NCT03752008 NR NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Tomayko 2016 Tomayko 2019 NR NCT01776255 . 1. Included 1. Included Toussaint 2021 NL5850 (NTR‐old NTR6030) 2. Awaiting Toussaint 2023 [ 483 ] Trost 2021 [ 484 ] Tucker 2016 [ 485 , 486 ] NL8883 ACTRN12621000055808 ISRCTN70604107 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing 3. Ongoing Vaughn 2021 NCT02330354 1. Included Venderhout 2020 [ 487 ] NCT03914807 3. Ongoing Vidoni 2014 [ 488 ] Wadsworth 2020 [ 489 ] n/a NR 9. Excluded 9. Excluded Walton 2015 NCT02222766 1. Included Ward 2011 [ 490 , 491 ] NCT00998348 9. Excluded Ward 2020 NCT01814215 1. Included Willis 2022 [ 492 ] n/a 9. Excluded Yilmaz 2015 NR 1. Included Yin 2022 [ 493 ] NCT03590834 9. Excluded Yoong 2020 ACTRN12616000974404 1. Included Yoong 2022 [ 494 ] ACTRN12621000987864 9. Excluded Zask 2012 NR 1. Included Ziegler 2009 [ 495 ] ISRCTN11131792 3. Ongoing Listed alphabetically; n/a: not applicable; NR: not reported Included studies Details of the methods, participants (including the number randomised to the intervention and control group), characteristics of interventions (including duration and length of follow‐up), outcome measures, and notes on funding for the 67 included studies are illustrated in Supplementary material 2 . An overview of the interventions and comparators used in the included studies is provided in Table 5 . Table 6 summarises equity‐related characteristics of participants based on (i) inclusion of children living with disabilities and (ii) targeting of the intervention towards children within under‐served/disadvantaged families, settings, or communities. Overviews of reported data on serious adverse events, costings, and PROGRESS characteristics are available in Table 7 , Table 8 , Table 9 , and Table 10 . Finally, Table 11 presents the characteristics of included studies not pooled in meta‐analyses. 2 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (i) Description of the interventions and comparators Study ID Meta‐analysis outcome(s)* Characteristics of intervention ‡ Behaviours examined Comparator Characteristics of comparator Adamo 2017 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs PA – BMI (Short Term) Pre‐school physical activity intervention with or without a parent‐facilitated home component. Two workshop training sessions, each lasting 3 hours, were delivered to childcare providers and centre directors by a qualified trainer. The Activity Begins in Childhood (ABC) resource training manual outlined a recommended activity program with log sheets to track daily activities, the MusiGo preschool activity programming with a detailed guidebook, and a starter kit of equipment that formed the basis of training for the childcare providers and the intervention itself. Many sites were fully equipped, but others required supplemental equipment. CHILDCARE/ CHILDCARE+HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: (childcare educators and parents) The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: no The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour (yes) Provide/educate childcare educators/parents (yes) Change the social environment (yes) Change the physical environment (yes) Change in policy (no) Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Control ‐ Waitlist Waitlist Control: Childcare centres randomised to the waitlist comparison continued to provide their regular curriculum during the study period. They received the intervention staff training and resources after final data collection was completed at their centre. Alkon 2014 DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) Five x 1‐hour intervention (called NAP SACC, Nutrition and physical activity self‐assessment for childcare) workshops for childcare providers and other staff (e.g., cooks, administrators) at each of the intervention centres on (1) childhood obesity, (2) healthy eating for young children, (3) physical activity for young children, (4) personal health and wellness, and (5) working with families to promote healthy behaviours. Seven of the intervention centres also received the parent workshop, “Raising Healthy Kids.” The workshops were held in the childcare centres. In addition, the centre directors were helped to write or update the nutrition and physical activity policies. They also provided at least monthly on‐site consultations and additional phone or email consultations and distributed posters and information sheets on nutrition and physical activities. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Physical activity Nutrition Control ‐Waitlist Waitlist Control ‐ The control centres received the delayed NAP SACC intervention in year two of the study. Altarrah 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) Intervention was a simple 10 tips for parents leaflet, with examples. Informative leaflet providing nutritional advice and strategies for toddlers. The leaflet was called 'Eat Right Emirates tool' and was developed from the Ten Steps for Healthy Toddlers developed by the Infant and Toddler Forum, UK. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sleep Sedentary behaviour Nutrition Control ‐ treatment as usual No detail but assume no intervention Barber 2016 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) The intervention was delivered in outdoor primary school playgrounds at specific times to coincide with when school‐aged children were delivered to or collected from school, as identified by the school. Six 30‐min PiP sessions per week were available for 30 weeks, and families were encouraged to attend three sessions a week. The initiation phase (10 weeks) was facilitated by a member of school staff. Each session included two 5‐min structured‐play activities for parents and children to engage in together, 15 minutes of free play (during which handouts were given and guided discussions conducted with parents) and an active tidy‐up. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity only Control ‐ Treatment as usual No intervention Barkin 2012 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) The culturally tailored Salud Con La Familia (Health with the Family) program consisted of weekly 90‐minute skills‐building sessions for parents and preschool‐aged children designed to improve nutritional family habits, increase weekly physical activity, and decrease media use (sedentary activity). All sessions were conducted in Spanish by the same trained facilitator. Participants were randomly assigned to small social groups (6–8 parent–child dyads), and at each session they were assigned small group activities (engaging both parents and children as the focus of the intervention) and specific group roles. COMMUNITY The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutritional habits Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (media use) Nutrition Control – Other Intervention A brief school readiness program. Barkin 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) Family‐based, community‐centred, skills‐building intervention. The intervention focused on changing behaviour and featured several key strategies hypothesised to maximize health behaviour change, including (1) considering the health behaviours of both parent and child, (2) using the built environment of existing community centres, (3) implementing a tiered‐intensity intervention to maximize the sustainability of participation, and (4) using an adaptive intervention. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sleep Sedentary behaviour (media time) Nutrition Control ‐ school readiness School readiness sessions Bellows 2013 NA The Mighty Moves intervention lasted 18 weeks and was conducted in the classroom 4 days per week for 15–20 min each day, for a total of 72 lessons. Lessons comprised multiple activities (143 total) and were led by the classroom teacher. Activities focused on a skill or group of skills from one of the three gross motor skill categories: stability (trunk strength), locomotor (running, hopping, skipping), or manipulation (ball skills). In addition to Mighty Moves for intervention classrooms, both intervention and control classrooms implemented Food Friends, a 12‐wk nutrition program shown to increase children’s willingness to try new foods. Materials supporting the lessons, as well as creative themes and concepts, were provided as a kit for each intervention classroom. Home connection materials were sent home throughout the program, including educational handouts and a copy of the Mighty Moves music CD. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Gross motor skill performance Nutrition Diet element of the intervention Other intervention ‐ diet related only Birken 2012 PA vs Control ‐ zBMI (Medium Term) Parents in the intervention group received a 10‐min behavioural counselling intervention by trained study personnel directly after the health maintenance visit, which included information on the health impact of screen time in children and provided strategies to decrease screen time. These strategies included suggestions such as removing the TV from the child’s bedroom, encouraging meals to be eaten without the TV on, and budgeting of the child’s screen time. Families were encouraged to try a 1‐ week TV turn off, in which children were encouraged to spend time without the TV and were provided with a calendar and stickers to reward the children for days without the TV. Contingency planning for time spent not watching TV was promoted. Activities for the child during this session included providing a story to parents about TV viewing and receiving a handout on good TV habits. PRIMARY CARE SETTING The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Nutrition (Meals in front of TV) Control ‐ Also received a handout on managing media in the home Parents of children in both the intervention and control groups received standardised counselling from trained study personnel on safe media use, which included information on TV rating systems, internet safety, and limiting exposure to violent programming. They both received a previously published Canadian Pediatric Society parent handout titled “Managing Media in the Home.” Bonis 2014 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Intervention (NAP SACC) consultants delivered four workshops that demonstrated the importance of physical activity and nutrition. The workshop topics included overweight, nutrition, physical activity, and growing healthy kids. The consultants maintained regular contact with the treatment facility staff and provided support in addressing any barriers that would prevent achievement of their specific facility improvement plan. They also distributed educational information to the parent/guardian that focused on physical activity and nutrition recommendations at home. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Control ‐ Waitlist Waitlist control ‐ Control group had access to NAP SACC programme after completion of the project Bonvin 2013 PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Behavioural strategies aiming to improve knowledge about physical activity benefits and to increase pleasure, self‐efficacy and skills and to integrate physical activity into the daily life of the childcare. The physical activity intervention integrated several components that have been previously shown to be effective: 1) Training and support of the educators, 2) Rearrangement of the childcare built environment, 3) Encouragement of parental involvement, 4) Recommendation of daily physical activity. Five workshops providing theoretical and practical physical activity support were held for the educators of the respective intervention childcare centres, given by the coordinator, by sport scientists specialised in physical activity and health and by physicians. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Specifically motor skills Control ‐ Treatment as usual The control group did not receive any intervention and continued their regular program. Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) – Quick 2018;DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term);DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) – Quick 2018 Flexible engagement with intervention possible. Intervention was in 2 phases (levels). Both phases took between 2‐4 months to complete. Parent‐directed online intervention to provide information and motivation to make quick, easy, no‐cost changes to their home environments and lifestyles to support optimal child growth and development. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (screen time) Nutrition Control‐ Home safety Intervention Other unrelated intervention ‐ Home safety intervention Davis 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) The six components of the CHILE intervention were: (1) a nutrition and physical activity curriculum for the childcare centres that was designed to provide children with repeated opportunities to taste a new fruit or vegetable and to add 30 minutes of physical activity to daily class activities; (2) quarterly professional development training for childcare teachers and food service staff; (3) a component focused on integrating policy and behaviour change in food purchasing, preparation, and serving by childcare centre food service staff; (4) a family component consisting of take‐home materials about nutrition and physical activity and family events reinforcing these messages; (5) a local grocery store component with the goal of increasing availability and visibility of healthier food options and providing recipes and nutrition‐related information to families while shopping; and (6) a component that asked local healthcare providers to emphasise healthy eating and physical activity during routine patient visits. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Nutrition Control – assumed treatment as usual as no details are reported Not reported De Bock 2012 NA Nutrition experts delivered the intervention during fifteen standardised 2‐hour sessions, mostly during childcare hours, conducted once weekly over a 6‐month period, with five of these sessions actively involving parents by targeting them alone (discussions on parents’ modelling role and nutritional needs of children) or together with their children. Intervention activities consisted of familiarising with different food types and preparation methods as well as cooking and eating meals together in groups of children, teachers and parents. One session additionally focused on healthy drinking behaviours. Pre‐school group teachers assisted the external nutrition expert during each session to enable them to sustain intervention‐related activities after the study end. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition (Eating behaviours) Control‐ Waitlist Waitlist control. Pre‐schools in the waiting‐list control arm received the same intervention 6 months later than the intervention arm (no further information provided) Dennison 2004 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term);PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Childcare intervention delivered by one early childhood teacher and a music teacher. This was part of larger 'Brocodile the Crocodile' health promotion programme, which lasted for 39 weeks for 1 hour each week including 32 sessions on healthy eating. 7 educational sessions assessed intervention to encourage reduction of TV viewing for both parents and children. 7 sessions that were the target of this study included: weekly 20‐minute interactive, educational sessions were led by program staff, but day care and preschool staff were actively encouraged to participate. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Sedentary behaviour (Screen‐time) Control ‐ Safety and Injury Prevention Safety and injury prevention program Derwig 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Low‐intensive multi‐component child‐centred intervention. Eight animated illustrations based on important healthy choices associated with a long‐term healthy lifestyle (fruit and vegetable consumption, drinking water, portion size, physical activity, tooth brushing and bedtime routines) as well as a neutral discussion on the child's growth using the BMI growth chart. CHILD HEALTH CENTRES The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sleep (bedtime routine) Nutrition Control ‐ 'treatment as usual' Usual care, i.e. no intervention Feng 2004 NA When giving healthcare lectures to kindergarten teachers and parents of young children every year, the content of health education on the prevention and treatment of children's simple obesity is added to the teachers and parents of the intervention group's class, while the control group does not involve this aspect of knowledge. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Nutrition Control ‐ treatment as usual Usual care Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Multicomponent intervention delivered to childcare educators on promoting healthy diet, increasing physical activity, understanding the human body and managing emotions. Families were also invited to informational and educational meetings. CHILDCARE (and some home) The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Control – treatment as usual Usual care Fisher 2019 D vs Control – BMI (Short Term);D vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term);D vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) Intervention content was guided heavily by current theoretical perspectives on authoritative food parenting that emphasise the use of structure and autonomy support in feeding. Feeding practices that promote structure were emphasised, including establishing eating routines, setting limits, and providing children with guided choices, whereas a number of practices promoting autonomy support were also emphasised, including effective praise, responsiveness to child hunger and satiety cues, and parental modelling. Intervention modules also targeted aspects of the family eating environment known to influence children’s intake of energy‐dense foods, including portion sizes. Particular attention was given to SSBs and the quality of foods offered as snacks. Twelve 60‐minute weekly in‐person group sessions were delivered. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Control‐ Waitlist Waitlist control: Those in the control group were offered the intervention after completion of the 12 week post‐intervention measures. No further information provided. Fitzgibbon 2005 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term);DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Child intervention: 14 weeks (3 times/week) of a diet/physical activity intervention delivered by trained early childhood educators. Each session included:1) 20 min nutrition activity introducing a healthy eating or exercise concept with activity, 2) 20 min aerobic activity based on physical activity (5 min warm up, 10 mins aerobic activity and 5 min cool down). Children used multiple games and approaches, such as aerobic 'trips to the zoo' where children pretended to be different animals. Parent intervention: Received weekly newsletters that mirrored the children's curriculum (including section on healthy eating and section on physical activity). CHILDCARE AND HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group (for children), individual (for parent) The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (TV viewing) Nutrition Control group ‐ general health concepts training General health concepts: 14‐week (20 minutes, 1 time weekly) class in which they learned about a variety of general health concepts such as dental health, immunisation, seat belt safety, and 911 procedures. Parents received weekly newsletters that mirrored the general health intervention. No information on diet or physical activity was presented. Fitzgibbon 2006 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Children intervention: 14 weeks (3 x weekly) of diet/PHYSICAL ACTIVITY curriculum delivered by trained early childhood educators. Each session included 20 minutes of aerobic activity that was not based on skill building but on overall moderate to vigorous movement. Target behaviours for the intervention included fruit and veg consumption, decreased fat intake, decreased sedentary behaviour and increased physical activity. Parent intervention: Weekly newsletters that mirrored the children's curriculum and accompanying homework assignments that were designed to be an interactive activity between parents and children. Parents received 12 homework assignments during the 14‐week intervention. CHILDCARE AND HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group (for children), individual (for parent) The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (TV viewing) Nutrition Control group ‐ general health concepts training General health concepts: 14‐week (20 minutes, 1 time weekly) class in which children learned about a variety of general health concepts such as dental health, immunisation, seat belt safety, and 911 procedures. Parents received weekly newsletters that mirrored the general health intervention. No information on diet or physical activity was presented. Fitzgibbon 2011 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) – Fitzgibbon 2011; DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) – Kong 2016;DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Children intervention: 14 weeks (3 x weekly) of diet/PHYSICAL ACTIVITY curriculum delivered by trained early childhood educators. Each session included 20 minutes of aerobic activity that was not based on skill building but on overall moderate to vigorous movement. Target behaviours for the intervention included fruit and veg consumption, decreased fat intake, decreased sedentary behaviour and increased physical activity. Parent intervention: Weekly newsletters that mirrored the children's curriculum and accompanying homework assignments that were designed to be an interactive activity between parents and children. Parents received 12 homework assignments during the 14‐week intervention. CHILDCARE AND HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group (for children), individual (for parent) The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No ‐ Physical Activity ‐ Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) ‐ Nutrition Control group ‐ general health concepts training General health concepts: 14‐week (20 minutes, 1 time weekly) class in which children learned about a variety of general health concepts such as dental health, immunisation, seat belt safety, and 911 procedures. Parents received weekly newsletters that mirrored the general health intervention. No information on diet or physical activity was presented. French 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term);DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Long Term) Multicomponent obesity prevention intervention, consisting of home visiting, community‐based parenting classes and telephone check‐in calls. Home visit enabled behaviour and home environment change strategies to be tailored to families, parenting class provided group support. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual (though with elements of group through parenting classes) The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Sedentary behaviour (TV viewing; Screen Time) Nutrition Control ‐ treatment as usual Usual care – though primary care providers discussed child BMI with parents, and gave pamphlets with child’s BMI percentile, and messages about eating and physical activity. Parents in comparison also received quarterly postcards on child development/school readiness. Gao 2019 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) The intervention program requested children participate in home‐based educational exergaming using the LeapTV gaming console for at least 30 min/session 5 times/week beyond their usual physical activity levels. Children were provided with a LeapTV gaming console, all necessary peripherals, several age‐appropriate educational 'exergames' (dance and sports) for use during their time completing the educational exergaming intervention, and a link to tutorials that parents and their child(ren) could use to guide them through the learning process. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: Yes The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Control – Waitlist control Waitlist control ‐ The control condition asked children to maintain regular PA patterns & discouraged sedentary video game play during the study. Gato‐Moreno 2021 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) The intervention was carried out by a dietetic technician in collaboration with school physicians. The first intervention was delivered at the beginning of the first year through a set of six 2‐hour group training sessions, given every two weeks; and a follow‐up intervention at the beginning of the second year through a 3‐hour session. In these six sessions, group and interactive activities were used to address the following topics: introduction to nutrition, healthy eating habits, keys to improving nutrition and eating habits, designing healthy and attractive menus, physical activity and food labelling. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: No Change in policy: No Physical activity Nutrition Control – assumed treatment as usual No information was provided in the paper about the nature of the control group. Goldfield 2016 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term);PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) The intervention was based on a train‐the‐trainer approach consisting of an experienced master trainer who provided two 3‐hour training workshops to childcare providers, along with a resource training manual. The 6‐month intervention also included 12, 1‐hour, biweekly “booster” sessions in the childcare centres by the master trainer. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Control ‐ Treatment as usual Treatment as usual: childcare centres implemented their standard curriculum. Haines 2013 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Major components of the intervention included (1) motivational coaching by a health educator during 4 home visits and 4 health coaching telephone calls, (2) mailed educational materials and incentives, and (3) weekly text messages on adoption of household routines. Each home visit included (1) a check‐in to review progress and setbacks to behaviour change, (2) discussion of behaviour change goals and collaborative goal‐setting, and (3) a concrete activity or tool the parent could use to support behaviour change. The monthly coaching calls were designed to assess participants’ progress on making changes, provide support for challenges that arose, and reinforce study messages. The intervention focused on promotion of 4 household behaviours: eating meals together as a family, obtaining adequate sleep, limiting TV time, and removing the TV from the child’s bedroom. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sleep Sedentary behaviour (screen time) Nutrition Control group – other unrelated intervention Educational packages on early childhood milestones‐ 4 monthly mailed packages that included educational materials on reaching developmental milestones during early childhood and low‐cost incentives (e.g. colouring books). Materials focused on milestones such as social/emotional, language, cognitive, motor. Haines 2016 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) Family‐based obesity prevention intervention, which involved lessons related to parental roles in promoting healthy nutrition and activity behaviours among their children. Parents had weekly homework assignments to enhance skill building and self‐efficacy. Intervention also included an interactive children’s program that ran concurrently with the parent program. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Sleep Sedentary behaviour (TV viewing) Physical activity (Active play) Nutrition (Sugar‐sweetened beverage intake) Control group – other unrelated intervention Educational packages on early childhood milestones‐ 4 monthly mailed packages that included educational materials on reaching developmental milestones during early childhood and low‐cost incentives (e.g. colouring books). Materials focused on milestones such as social/emotional, language, cognitive, motor. Hammersley 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Intervention participants received an 11‐week internet‐based healthy lifestyle program. The intervention targeted multiple behaviours and consisted of 6 modules including an introduction, nutrition, physical activity, screen time, and sleep module, which were completed by the participants over an 11‐week period. Each module comprised reading material, videos, activities, quizzes, and a goal‐setting component. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: Yes The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sleep habits Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Nutrition Control ‐ light touch email Light touch email intervention. Participants randomised to the comparison group received fortnightly emails, which contained links to a parenting website. The topics were similar to Time2bHealthy (nutrition, physical activity, screen time, and sleep) and also included other general health information. There were no interactive components available to this group. Hammersley 2021 DPA vs DPA – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) PHONE=Healthy Habits Plus is an enhanced version of the Healthy Habits telephone‐based intervention; the revised intervention consisted of 6 20‐ to 30‐min telephone support calls intended to be delivered over three months, focusing on healthy eating and movement behaviours (physical activity, screen time, and sleep). Calls were conducted by interviewers with experience in conducting health‐related interviews and surveys, but not necessarily with a health qualification. Behaviour change techniques such as barrier identification, goal setting, self‐monitoring, prompts, and cues were used during the calls, and participants received printed materials to work through in between calls. ONLINE = Time2bHealthy is an online intervention consisting of six modules to be delivered over a 3‐month period. Like Healthy Habits Plus, the intervention also focuses on healthy eating and movement behaviours (physical activity, screen time, and sleep). HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: Yes The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Sleep DPA‐ Online DPA ‐ included written information only, comprised ten information sheets and a summary booklet Hawkins 2019 DPA vs DPA – zBMI (Short Term) The DRIVE curriculum was a structured parenting program to promote healthy weight in children by relying on behavioural principles to promote skill acquisition in the family’s natural setting. Consists of 15 in‐person sessions in the family’s home. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical Activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen Time) DPA ‐ light touch intervention materials The control arm was mailed information on nutrition and physical activity at the beginning of the 19‐week intervention. Nutrition information provided was based on the MyPlate Web site, in addition to information on proper nutrition and suggested levels of physical activity for pre‐schoolers. Finally, families were provided with the free parenting strategy booklet. Heerman 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term);DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Competency‐Based Approaches to Community Health (COACH) was a randomised controlled trial. The intervention included 15 weekly, 90‐minute sessions followed by 3 months of twice‐monthly health coaching calls. The content of modules included didactic and skills‐building sessions on healthy diet, physical activity, sleep, engaged parenting, and media use. Sessions were conducted by a health coach in local community centres, with groups of 8‐11 parent‐child pairs. COMMUNITY The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Control – other unrelated intervention School Readiness Intervention ‐ The control group was a twice‐monthly school readiness curriculum for 3 months. Hodgkinson 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Childcare staff were trained using an educational resource; 1 day focus on healthy eating and 1 on physical activity. This included policies and provision for healthy eating and physical activity. The intervention at family level was the Healthy Heroes Activity Pack: delivered over 6 months by Centre staff to promote healthy eating and physical activity in a fun, interactive way. CHILDCARE + HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare providers and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Physical activity Nutrition (Healthy Eating) Control No intervention no information provided. Hughes 2021 NA The intervention program teaches parents and children to pay attention to children’s internal cues of hunger and fullness and to increase children’s willingness to try new foods. Also included are strategies for promoting appropriate child portion sizes, tactics for encouraging family routines and structure, and information for dealing with outside influences on family eating. The program includes 7 lessons delivered to families sequentially over 7 weeks. As part of the 7 curriculum lessons, videos and experiential learning activities reinforce the information presented. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents (though intervention delivered at childcare) The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Control –treatment as usual Usual care ‐ Received no intervention curriculum. Iaia 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term);DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Motivational interviews with parents to encourage children's healthy behaviours at home. Teachers received 10‐hour training to promote more active play at childcare centres and involved children in learning experiences about healthy behaviours. Informational tools available for teachers and parents and learning experiences to increase fruit and veg consumption, limit sugary drinks, and reduce TV time. CHILDCARE + HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (TV viewing) Control ‐ treatment as usual Control children’s parents were offered routine healthcare advice during child health visits. At the same time, control children were involved in the usual learning experiences at childcare centres. Jouret 2009 NA Received kindergarten‐based education to promote healthy practices related to nutrition, physical activity, and sedentary behaviours. Children also received audio cassette and story book to reinforce educational messages, whilst parents were provided with information on nutrition and physical activity. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents and children The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical Activity Sedentary behaviour (Reducing TV watching) DPA Received basic information on overweight and health. Klein 2010 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Information meeting for parents and educators to enhance awareness of a healthy lifestyle and to impact parental skills and competencies concerning nutrition, physical activity and stress management. The importance of physical activity for children, consequences of physical inactivity, basics of healthy nutrition and self‐management were contents. CHILDCARE + HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Physical activity (motor skills) Nutrition Control – assumed treatment as usual No information listed for control group Kobel 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) “Join the Healthy Boat” ‐ Health promotion programme which aims at a healthy lifestyle of kindergarten children and supports among others the prevention of overweight and obese children. The three key topics of the programme are the promotion of physical activity, the reduction of screen media consumption, and a healthier diet. All intervention materials are integrated into the everyday life of kindergartens so no external staff or extra time is required. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity (Motor ability specifically) Sedentary behaviour (Screen viewing) Nutrition Control – treatment as usual The control group followed the regular kindergarten life with no contact during that year. Linville (Study 1) 2020 and Linville (Study 2) 2020 Note: the only difference between Study 1 and Study 2 is the population/ sample. DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) 8‐session, 12‐hour family‐based group intervention. Adult caregivers and children participated in separate group sessions that occurred simultaneously. The intervention targeted individual and family‐level change in lifestyle habits, such as improving diet and exercise; to foster these changes the interventionists encouraged parent/caregiver participants to set attainable health goals and model health behaviours for their children. The intervention program intentionally does not focus on weight loss and aims to avoid sociocultural messages that can lead to subsequent problems with self‐esteem, depression, and eating disorders. COMMUNITY CENTRE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Nutrition Control – unrelated intervention Educational Video ‐ Families randomly assigned to the comparison condition were sent a link to an educational video (content not described) Lumeng 2017 NA The POPS (Preschool Obesity Prevention) intervention was based on social cognitive theory, was developed to provide developmentally and culturally appropriate, evidence‐based, and coordinated obesity‐prevention messages to preschoolers and their parents. Behavioural goals included increased frequency and variety of fruit and vegetable intake, reduced sugar‐sweetened beverage consumption, reduced screen time, cooking healthy meals at home, eating family meals, and eating healthy foods when eating out. The IYS (Incredible Years Series) intervention emphasises positive behavioural management techniques and enhances self‐regulation in young, low‐income children.‍ The IYS uses observational learning and reinforcement techniques and emphasises behaviour‐change strategies such as descriptive commenting about child behaviour, role‐plays, and coaching to encourage and model positive behaviour.‍ CHILDCARE + HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Other interventions, focusing on diet but with the addition of behavioural intervention 3 study arms: ‐HS (Head Start) ‐HS + POPS (Head Start and Preschool Obesity Prevention Series) ‐HS+POPS+IYS (Head Start and Preschool Obesity Prevention Series and Incredible Years Series) Malden 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Practitioner training sessions with additional classroom materials, with main focus on physical activity and sedentary behaviour for 18 weeks. Parents received sticker wall chart and bi‐weekly activity packs containing tips/games/newsletters. Intervention was adapted from the Toybox intervention, as described in another trial (Manios 2022). CHILDCARE + HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Nutrition Control – treatment as usual Usual care ‐ i.e. 'Regular curriculum' Manios 2022 NA The ToyBox‐intervention focused on four different energy balance‐related behaviours (water consumption, healthy snacking, sedentary behaviour and physical activity). It is a multicomponent kindergarten‐based, family involved, intervention. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (mainly screen time) Nutrition Control ‐ assumed treatment as usual No information on control group Morgan 2022 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) The intervention supported fathers to optimise their parenting practices in relation to physical activity and nutrition. The intervention comprised three main components: (i) fathers‐only workshops, (ii) weekly group sessions for fathers and children and (iii) an Activity Handbook containing weekly home tasks. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Nutrition Control ‐ Waitlist Waitlist control. No further information provided. Morshed 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) The HEALTH intervention was a lifestyle intervention based on Diabetes Prevention; intervention focused on maternal obesity‐related behaviours, such as limiting intake of sugar‐sweetened beverages, substituting fruits and vegetables for high‐caloric snacks, limiting portion sizes, increasing physical activity by walking 30 min/d, and decreasing sedentary activity. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Control – treatment as usual Usual care: 'Treatment as usual' Mo‐Suwan 1998 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Exercise programme that consisted of a 15‐minute walk before the morning class began and a 20‐minute aerobic dance session after the afternoon nap ‐ 3x per week. Aerobic session led by trained personnel. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Children The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: No Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Control – treatment as usual Usual care ‐ 'Followed the usual curriculum' Natale 2017 NA Intervention consists of (1) menu modifications, (2) a healthy eating and physical activity curriculum for children, and (3) a parent curriculum for healthy meal preparation, reinforced through a role modelling curriculum. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Control – other unrelated intervention Injury prevention/safety intervention ‐ schools randomised to the control arm received an attention‐control injury prevention curriculum delivered by “Safety Sam”, a character who provided parents and teachers with home, car, and child seat information. Natale 2021 NA Intervention consists of (1) menu modifications, (2) a healthy eating and physical activity curriculum for children, and (3) a parent curriculum for healthy meal preparation, reinforced through a role modelling curriculum. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Control – other unrelated intervention Injury prevention/safety intervention ‐ schools randomised to the control arm received an attention‐control injury prevention curriculum delivered by “Safety Sam”, a character who provided parents and teachers with home, car, and child seat information. Nezami 2017 D vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Smartphone delivered intervention to reduce parent‐provided sugar‐sweetened beverage and juice (SSB/juice) consumption HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: Yes The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Control ‐ waitlist Waitlist control: The waitlist control group attended one group session where they received their randomization and were asked to continue with their normal behaviours during the next 6 months, during which time they received no intervention. They received a modified version of the intervention following the 6‐month assessments. Olsen 2020 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) The intervention delivered guidance tailored to the needs of each family on how to optimise diet and physical activity habits, as well as reduce stress, and improve sleep quality and quantity of the child. To support the health consultants in planning the consultations, key[1]words focusing on what to do to acquire/maintain healthy habits were prepared for each of the four intervention areas, while tools to change behaviour in a healthier direction were created for each keyword, to provide suggestions for the family on how to do it. Together with the consultant, each family decided which tools they were motivated to work with until the next consultation, using the stages of change model. Health Care Setting The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: YesChange in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Sleep Control and shadow control Control group were aware of their child’s weight status, whereas shadow control was established to investigate intervention effects compared to a group blinded to their child’s susceptibility to obesity. Ostbye 2012 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Short Term) Participants in the intervention arm received 8 monthly mailed interactive kits, followed each month by a 20‐ to 30‐ minute telephone coaching session using motivational interviewing techniques. Kits included child activities and incentives reinforcing the month's topic (e.g. a rewards chart, yoga mat, pedometer, portion plate). The intervention targeted the dyad's healthy weight via instruction in parenting styles and skills, techniques for stress management (including emotion regulation), and education about healthy behaviours. Parenting skill instruction emphasised 1) an authoritative parenting style, 2) routines for sleep and mealtimes, 3) a supportive home environment, 4) role modelling of healthy eating and physical activity, and 5) improvement of feeding style. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Sleep (Bedtime routines) Control – unrelated intervention Control participants received monthly newsletters emphasizing pre‐reading skills. Penalvo 2015 NA SI! Program aimed to instil and develop healthy behaviours in relation to diet, physical activity, and understanding how the human body and heart work. Over the academic year, teachers delivered the intervention through classroom materials for a minimum of 20 h for the diet, physical activity, and human body components and a minimum of 10 h for the emotion management component. Additionally, the intervention included activities for the family over the weekends, as well as strategies involving the whole school environment, such as an annual health fair. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Children The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity Control – treatment as usual Usual care 'Treatment as usual' Reilly 2006 PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) The intervention intended to increase levels of physical activity and children's fundamental movement skills and meet the requirements of the “physical development and movement” component of the nursery curriculum in Scotland. Families received resource packs. CHILDCARE+HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: Individual for families, Group for childcare intervention elements The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical Activity (Increasing play, fundamental movement skills) Sedentary behaviour Control – treatment as usual Usual care ‐ 'Treatment as usual' Roth 2015 PA vs Control ‐ BMI Percentile (Short and Medium Term) Multi‐component programme with 3 main elements: 1) PA lessons: Daily 30‐minute PA lessons in kindergarten (teachers could determine content, but attended 2x workshops with info about the intervention beforehand). Teachers received supervision during the PE lessons and could ask for advice/counselling at any time during the intervention. 2) PA homework: One or two of these illustrated cards were given to the child per week to practice at home. Furthermore, to stimulate an active lifestyle of the child and his or her family in general and especially during the holidays, seasonal letters to the family suggesting activity games needed to be prepared.3) Parental education: Three educational interactive meetings were planned for parents, focussing on development and promotion of motor skills during preschool years, as well as the importance of physical activity, healthy nutrition, and the reduction of media consumption in childhood. CHILDCARE + HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: Individual and as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Control – Treatment as usual Routine schedule with common daily activity and weekly physical activity class they used to run before participating in the study, but without formal motor skill teaching and without promotion of physical activity. Sherwood 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) The intervention and control groups received a brief paediatric primary care component (PCP) and eight phone coaching sessions. The brief PCP counselling took place during their well‐child visit to raise parental awareness of their child’s obesity risk and provide messaging regarding obesity and injury‐prevention behaviours. The groups then received an eight‐session phone coaching program focused a) on healthy eating and physical activity (intervention group) and a Busy Bag or b) safety and injury prevention (control group). The Busy Bag included: a child‐focused book on television (TV) habits, activity and dinner table conversation idea cards, portion placement and plate, a kid‐friendly, healthy recipe pamphlet, small plastic cones, sidewalk chalk, stickers, a child‐focused dance music CD, and an inflatable beach ball. PRIMARY CARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No ‐ Physical activity ‐ Nutrition ‐ Sedentary behaviour (TV time) Control – other unrelated intervention Safety and injury prevention ‐ Healthy Tots/Safe Spots Skouteris 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Involved 10 weekly 90‐min workshops relating to nutrition, physical activity, parenting and lifestyle behaviours. Each programme group consisted of parent–child dyads and one to three MEND 2–4 trained programme leaders. Each session included three sections: (i) 30 min of guided active play; (ii) 15 min of healthy snack time based on an evidence‐based, exposure technique to promote acceptance of fruit and vegetables and (iii) 45 min of supervised creative play activities for the children while parents attended an interactive education and skill development session. Guided active play involved games played with children and parents together that could be easily replicated at home. Healthy snack time centred on a role model (puppet called ‘Max Moon’) who encouraged children to sniff, touch, lick and taste fresh fruit and vegetables. Parents received weekly handouts. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity (Active play) Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Nutrition Control – waitlist Waitlist control ‐ Did not receive any intervention but were offered the programme at study completion. Slusser 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Class sessions to incorporate healthy nutrition and physical activity messages within existing field‐tested parent training modules. Examples of the nutrition and PA objectives were to include caregiver's knowledge about yes and no foods based on dietary guidelines; teach families how to practice behaviour modification strategies such as self‐monitoring; teach parents food strategies to increase vegetable and fruit food preferences for their children; to identify barriers to healthy lifestyles and review strategies to reduce these barriers. Parent training intervention to promote optimal nutrition and PA. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No ‐ Nutrition ‐ Physical activity Control ‐ Waitlist Waitlist Control: received care as usual and a standard nutritional information pamphlet developed by the Women. Infants and Children's supplemental food programme. Stookey 2017 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Integration of the intervention with routine bi‐annual public health screenings by nurses. Translated NAP SACC resources. In San Francisco, public health and childcare agencies partnered to adapt NAP SACC resources into an annual “Healthy Apple” quality improvement program (HAP). Intervention included Nutrition education (circle time for children) and tailored workshops and award incentives for child care providers to adopt nutrition and physical activity best practices CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Control – Waitlist control Usual care / 'Routine services' followed by delayed intervention Sun 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Technology‐based intervention to improve health behaviours. The intervention consisted of 8 weekly 30‐minute, interactive, Cantonese, educational modules accessed online via tablet computers. The topics were as follows: (a) Introduction to the 5‐4‐3‐2‐1‐0 program, (b) Energy balance—maintain a healthy weight, (c) What to feed my family—energy IN, (d) Grocery shopping, (e) Find fun in physical activity—energy OUT, (f) Less sit, more fit—decrease screen time, (g) Smart parenting, and (h) Maintain a healthy weight for life. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: Yes The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Physical activity Control – unrelated intervention Educational intervention ‐ Weekly mailings of printed information relevant to preschool‐aged children over the 8 weeks Swindle 2021 NA WISE is an intervention for the early care and education setting to support children’s exposure to and intake of fruits and vegetables. WISE emphasises 4 evidence‐based practices (EBPs): (1) use of a mascot; (2) educators’ role modelling; (3) positive feeding practices; and (4) hands‐on exposures. Compared a Basic and Enhanced implementation strategy. The Basic Strategy included training and reminders only; the Enhanced strategy was a multi‐faceted package of stakeholder‐selected strategies including a leadership commitment, an implementation blueprint, a local champion, an environmental reminder of the EBPs, facilitation, and tailored educational resources and incentives. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Educators The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Diet Control = Basic intervention: Training and reminders Intervention = Enhanced intervention: Multi‐faceted package of stakeholder‐selected strategies Tomayko 2016 DPA vs DPA‐ BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ BMI Percentile (Medium Term) Toolkits consisting of twelve culturally appropriate lesson plans, activities and resources. Each lesson addressed one of four target areas: (i) eat more fruits and vegetables; (ii) consume less soda and added sugar; (iii) become more active; and (iv) watch less TV. Families randomised to the mentored group (Intervention group) received toolkit lessons from a trained home mentor during twelve monthly home visits (~60 min each). Non‐mentored families (Control group) received toolkit lessons by mail. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Nutrition Sleep Control group = non‐mentored version of the intervention (DPA) Control group = a Mailed version of the intervention ‐ toolkit lessons received by mail. Tomayko 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) The Wellness Journey toolkit consisted of 12 monthly mailed healthy lifestyle lessons, items, and children’s books addressing 6 intervention targets: increase fruit and vegetable consumption, decrease sugar consumption, increase physical activity, decrease screen time, improve sleep habits, and decrease stress (adult only). Each monthly toolkit included (1) printed educational lessons with information and suggestions for activities, (2) supportive items (e.g., measuring cups, recipes, pedometers, games), and (3) a children’s book relating to one of the intervention targets to foster family interaction. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No ‐ Physical activity ‐ Sleep ‐ Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) ‐ Nutrition Control – unrelated intervention Child safety control kit Vaughn 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Intervention included posters in classrooms, invitations to parents to sign the Fit Family Promise, and a classroom activity. Followed by 4x6 week units where teachers lead classroom activities to build children’s knowledge and skills. Teachers received an outreach toolkit with resources to boost parental engagement. Parents received activity tracker to log at‐home activities. The intervention concluded with a celebration event. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Control – waitlist control Delayed access to intervention Walton 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Nine sessions delivered focusing on general parenting and weight‐related topic (being physically active with children; creating bedtime routines; alternatives to using food as rewards; TV – setting limits on TV time; hunger and satiety cues; reduce intake of sugar‐sweetened beverages; family‐based physical activity). HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Physical activity Sleep Sedentary behaviour (TV viewing) Nutrition Control – unrelated intervention Attention‐matched control home safety intervention Ward 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Intervention delivered through three workshops, three home visits, and nine phone calls. The Keys intervention was designed to help childcare providers create environments that support children's healthy eating and physical activity behaviours. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: Both individual and as a group elements The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity Control – unrelated intervention Business‐focused intervention Yilmaz 2015 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Intervention consisted of 3x printed materials and interactive CDs and one counselling call, intending to decrease screen time. 1) Read age‐appropriate books to children every day; a family mealtime with TV turned off; children encouraged to offer alternatives to watching TV; parents supported to place 'no TV or screen' signs on each TV or screen at home. Alternative ways of spending time was offered when not sitting in front of a screen. Parents were asked to move child's TV/computer from bedroom. 2) Counselling call, encouraged families to make their home screen‐free, it provided the benefits of a screen‐free home and difficulties to establish and keep a screen‐free home. 3) Picture book showing a family whilst making their home screen‐free. HOME The intervention is primarily delivered to: Parents The intervention is delivered: Individual The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Sedentary behaviour (Screen time) Control – treatment as usual Usual care Yoong 2020 D vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) The intervention (a web‐based menu‐planning tool and support) was designed to address barriers and enablers to dietary guideline implementation – web‐based menu planning program; provision of educational resources; reminders to make changes to their menu; training, educational resources and managerial support; ongoing support via phone calls. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators The intervention is delivered: as a group The intervention is delivered electronically: Yes The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: No Nutrition Control – treatment as usual Usual care Zask 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) The intervention strategies included skills development and awareness‐raising for parents, staff and children, and social support for parents to foster behaviour changes in their children through feedback and reinforcement (positive feedback and policies on food and drinks at childcare). Healthy eating strategies: Revise policies on appropriate/inappropriate foods for preschool lunchboxes, which was also communicated to parents. Pictorial posters of 'better foods' and 'foods better left out' displayed in prominent areas of childcare. Ensure all children could access drinking water at all times. Parents discouraged from packing sweet drinks, including fruit juice, to assist in promoting milk and water consumption. Interactive workshops on positive parenting and healthy eating, with particular emphasis on how to feed fussy eaters. Parents also encouraged to attend these sessions. CHILDCARE The intervention is primarily delivered to: Childcare educators and parents The intervention is delivered: Both individual and as a group elements The intervention is delivered electronically: No The intervention has an explicit component aiming to: Modify the child’s behaviour: Yes Provide/educate childcare educators/parents: Yes Change the social environment: Yes Change the physical environment: Yes Change in policy: Yes Nutrition Physical activity (mainly motor skills) Control – waitlist control Waiting list: Preschools that acted as control schools in one year, were on a waiting list for an intervention and were offered the full program in subsequent years. * D = Diet; PA = Physical Activity; DPA = Diet combined with Physical Activity; NA = not included in a meta‐analysis. ‡ Further details of the interventions and comparators, including duration and length of follow‐up, as well as the total number of participants and the number randomised to the intervention and control groups, can be found in Supplementary material 2 . 3 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (ii) Further details of the population Study ID Meta‐analysis outcome(s) Were children with physical disabilities excluded? Were children with mental disabilities excluded? Supporting evidence on the exclusion of children with physical and/or mental disabilities Does study specifically target disadvantaged children/ families in a particular setting and/or a school/ community within a disadvantaged area? Supporting evidence on targeting disadvantaged children/ families in a particular setting and/or school/ community within a disadvantaged area? Intervention type: Dietary only De Bock 2012 NA NR NR n/a No n/a Feng 2004 NA NR NR n/a No n/a Fisher 2019 D vs Control – BMI (Short Term);D vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term); D vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) Yes Yes Children were excluded if they had severe food allergies, special dietary restrictions, chronic medical conditions (e.g. diabetes), or had a developmental disorder (e.g. autism) that influenced eating and/or weight. Yes To be invited to participate, families were receiving/eligible for SNAP (the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children [WIC]), a 12‐week authoritative food parenting intervention for mothers with low‐income levels. Lumeng 2017 NA Yes Yes Exclusion criteria were significant medical problems or developmental disabilities. Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Nezami 2017 D vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Swindle 2021 NA NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Yoong 2020 D vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR but sites which exclusively served children with special needs were excluded. NR but sites which exclusively served children with special needs were excluded. n/a No n/a Intervention type: Activity only Adamo 2017 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs PA – BMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Barber 2016 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No No Clearly stated that no exclusion criteria were applied which related to child characteristics. Yes Pre‐schools invited to participate were located in the two poorest areas of the city of Bradford (UK). Bellows 2013 NA NR NR n/a Yes Targeted children attending Head Start Centres. Birken 2012 PA vs Control ‐ zBMI (Medium Term) Yes Yes Children were excluded if they had limitations in vision or hearing, ambulation, or cognitive delay because this could affect their screen time use and their ability to implement the intervention. No n/a Bonis 2014 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Bonvin 2013 PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Dennison 2004 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Gao 2019 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes Yes Only included children “possessing no mental or physical disabilities”. No n/a Goldfield 2016 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Mo‐Suwan 1998 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes NR Children were excluded if they had delayed development and could not fully participate in the exercise programme. No n/a Reilly 2006 PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Roth 2015 PA vs Control ‐ BMI Percentile (Short and Medium Term) NR NR n/a No Authors stated that the sample population was a mix of low/mid/high SES families. Yilmaz 2015 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Intervention type: Dietary and activity Alkon 2014 DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) Yes NR Exclusion criteria for enrolling children included chronic illnesses or conditions that affected nutritional status, severe food allergies, gastrointestinal disorders or mobility impairment. Yes Site (Childcare centre) inclusion criteria included: had a population of children in care primarily comprised of low‐income children. Altarrah 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Barkin 2012 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Barkin 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) Yes No Participants were excluded if a medical condition precluded routine physical activity. Yes Participants had to qualify for at least one service for under‐served populations. Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) – Quick 2018; DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) – Quick 2018 NR NR n/a No n/a Davis 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No YES Two children, one from the intervention and one from the control group, were excluded from the analysis because they had developmental disorders. Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Derwig 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No Although “geographical area could be deemed relatively high‐risk (low‐income) based on the ‘Care Need Index’ (mean 0.93 across Child Healthcare Centres).” Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Fitzgibbon 2005 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Fitzgibbon 2006 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Fitzgibbon 2011 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) – Fitzgibbon 2011; DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) – Kong 2016; DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. French 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Long Term) Yes Yes Children were excluded if they had a medical problem that would preclude study participation or used any medications that would affect the child’s growth. Yes Only included low‐income families. Gato‐Moreno 2021 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Haines 2013 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Yes Yes Children with chronic health conditions, such as severe cerebral palsy, were excluded. Yes Recruitment was from community health centres that served primarily low‐income families. Haines 2016 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) Yes Yes Children with severe health conditions that would prohibit them from participating in study activities (e.g., severe cerebral palsy) were excluded. Yes Recruited participants from community health centres, as well as community agencies, that primarily served low‐income families (e.g. the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children [WIC]). Hammersley 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Hammersley 2021 DPA vs DPA – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Hawkins 2019 DPA vs DPA – zBMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Heerman 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Hodgkinson 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a Yes Participating sites were Sure Start Early Years’ Centres. Hughes 2021 NA NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Iaia 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Jouret 2009 NA NR NR n/a No n/a Klein 2010 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Kobel 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Linville (Study 1) 2020 Linville (Study 2) 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No Study 1: n/a Study 2: n/a Although sample was restricted to Latinx immigrant families. Malden 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Yes Yes Children were excluded from the study if they had a health condition. Yes The study was conducted in Glasgow (UK) which is one of the most socioeconomically deprived areas in Western Europe, with over a third of the cities’ children estimated to be living in poverty Manios 2022 NA NR NR n/a No n/a Morgan 2022 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Morshed 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Natale 2017 NA NR NR n/a Yes Study sites were Childcare centres that participated in the USDA food program and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Natale 2021 NA NR but childcare centres were excluded if they had a high prevalence of special needs children. NR but childcare centres were excluded if they had a high prevalence of special needs children. n/a Yes Study sites were Childcare centres that participated in the USDA food program and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Olsen 2020 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) NR NR n/a No Although part of the sample was drawn from "one municipality, children with maternal low educational (low‐income) level (≤ 10 years)" Ostbye 2012 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Penalvo 2015 NA NR NR n/a No n/a Sherwood 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Skouteris 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a Slusser 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes Yes Children with a previous diagnosis of failure to thrive and medical complications associated with their overweight status (such as Prader‐Willi Syndrome) were excluded. Yes Only recruited from sites that served low‐income families, including Head Start centres. Stookey 2017 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No No Clearly stated that no exclusion criteria were applied which related to child characteristics. Yes Childcare centres with funding from Head Start were excluded. It appears that certain childcare centres that targeted disadvantaged families were excluded from the study. Sun 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes Yes Children who were unable to engage in daily activities were excluded. Yes Study sites were Head Start centres. Tomayko 2016 DPA vs DPA‐ BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ BMI Percentile (Medium Term) Yes Yes Excluded children who had any major physical or behavioural disorders. Yes Target sample was American Indians (AI) living in rural communities. Tomayko 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a Yes Target sample was American Indians (AI) living in urban and rural communities. Vaughn 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) NR but sites which exclusively served children with special needs were excluded. NR but sites which exclusively served children with special needs were excluded. n/a Yes “Of the 92 Childcare centres that participated in the study, most (93%) accepted subsidies and 72% participated in the Child and Adult Care Food Program.” Walton 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Yes Yes Children or their parents with severe health conditions (i.e., cardiac concerns, severe asthma) that would inhibit participation in study activities were excluded. No n/a Ward 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a Yes "Recruitment efforts effectively targeted a low‐income population" Zask 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) NR NR n/a No n/a D = Diet; PA = Physical Activity; DPA = Diet combined with Physical Activity; NA = not included in a meta‐analysis; n/a = not applicable; NR = not reported 4 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (iii) Description of serious adverse events Study ID Meta‐analysis outcome(s) Any data for serious adverse events reported? Serious adverse events related to the intervention/study participation observed? Serious adverse events details as reported by study authors Intervention type: Dietary only De Bock 2012 NA No n/a Feng 2004 NA No n/a Fisher 2019 D vs Control – BMI (Short Term); D vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term); D vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) No n/a Lumeng 2017 NA No n/a Nezami 2017 D vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Swindle 2021 NA No n/a Yoong 2020 D vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Intervention type: Activity only Adamo 2017 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs PA – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Barber 2016 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes None “There were no accidents or injuries related to the intervention reported” Bellows 2013 NA No n/a Birken 2012 PA vs Control ‐ zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Bonis 2014 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Bonvin 2013 PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a Dennison 2004 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a Gao 2019 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Goldfield 2016 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Mo‐Suwan 1998 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Reilly 2006 PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Roth 2015 PA vs Control ‐ BMI Percentile (Short and Medium Term) Yes None “The intervention did not lead to a significant difference between the intervention and control group in rates of accidents and infections.” Yilmaz 2015 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Intervention type: Dietary and activity Alkon 2014 DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) No n/a Altarrah 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) No n/a Barkin 2012 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Barkin 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) Yes None “One parent fractured an ankle while roller‐skating during an event at a local community centre. No additional intervention‐related adverse events occurred.” Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) – Quick 2018; DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) – Quick 2018 No n/a Davis 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a Derwig 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a “No adverse events were reported” Fitzgibbon 2005 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Yes None “No adverse events were reported for any participants as a function of the intervention.” Fitzgibbon 2006 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Yes None “There were no adverse events reported during the trial for any participants as a function of the intervention.” Fitzgibbon 2011/Kong 2016 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) – Fitzgibbon 2011; DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) – Kong 2016; DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a French 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Long Term) No n/a Gato‐Moreno 2021 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a Haines 2013 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Haines 2016 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Hammersley 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Hammersley 2021 DPA vs DPA – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) No n/a Hawkins 2019 DPA vs DPA – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Heerman 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a Hodgkinson 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a Hughes 2021 NA No n/a Iaia 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a Jouret 2009 NA No n/a Klein 2010 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Kobel 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) No n/a Linville (Study 1) 2020 and Linville (Study 2) 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Malden 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Manios 2022 NA No n/a Morgan 2022 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Morshed 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a Natale 2017 NA No n/a Natale 2021 NA No n/a Olsen 2020 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a Ostbye 2012 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Penalvo 2015 NA No n/a Sherwood 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) No n/a Skouteris 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term): DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Slusser 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Stookey 2017 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Sun 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a Tomayko 2016 DPA vs DPA‐ BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ BMI Percentile (Medium Term) No n/a Tomayko 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a Vaughn 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a Walton 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a Ward 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a Zask 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a D = Diet; PA = Physical Activity; DPA = Diet combined with Physical Activity; NA = not included in a meta‐analysis; n/a = not applicable; NR = not reported 5 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (iv) Description of costing information Study ID Meta‐analysis outcome(s) Costing data recorded? Intervention cost reported? (and any incentive payments for families) Trial cost reported? Economic evaluation conducted (reference) Intervention type: Dietary only De Bock 2012 NA No n/a No No Feng 2004 NA No n/a No No Fisher 2019 D vs Control – BMI (Short Term); D vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term); D vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Each family in both groups was compensated a total of US $400 for attendance at weekly sessions (FFF group only), participation in assessments, and travel to/from the research centre) No No Lumeng 2017 NA Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Families received $150 for participating in data collection activities; families were not compensated for participating in the interventions). No No Nezami 2017 D vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Swindle 2021 NA Yes The Basic intervention costs totalled US $640, which included the cost of WISE training (US $400), and 10 h of a researcher’s time to create the WISE Newsletters (US $23.88/h salary and benefits). This cost corresponds to US $35 per classroom. The Enhanced Intervention costs totalled US $5218, which included salary and fringe benefits for 3 facilitators, allowable mileage reimbursements at a rate of US $0.42/mile for travel expenses, and the actual cost of incentives and resources. In total, this corresponds to US $261 per classroom. In‐person facilitation accounted for 25% of our Enhanced costs; travel accounted for 23%; and incentives and resources accounted for 21%. The rest of the time was spent on preparation and miscellaneous tasks. No No Yoong 2020 D vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Intervention type: Activity only Adamo 2017 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs PA – BMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Barber 2016 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes Included a formal economic evaluation (but not reported in this paper) reported in: Barber S, Akhtar S, Jackson C, Bingham D, Hewitt C, Routen A, et al. Preschoolers in the playground: a pilot cluster randomised controlled trial of a physical activity intervention for children aged 18 months to 4 years. Public Health Res. 2015;3(5). http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK293651/. Yes (but not reported in this paper) Yes (but not reported in this paper) Bellows 2013 NA No n/a No No Birken 2012 PA vs Control ‐ zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Bonis 2014 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Bonvin 2013 PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Yes Each childcare centre received a budget of US $1500 for the rearrangement of their environment. No No Dennison 2004 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Gao 2019 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Parents received US $100 as an incentive for appropriate intervention implementation following the intervention.) No No Goldfield 2016 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Mo‐Suwan 1998 PA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No No (although stated that the intervention was intended to be cost‐neutral). No No Reilly 2006 PA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes The nursery element of the intervention: capital cost < £200, (€297, US $377). The home‐based element of the intervention had two parts and each participating family received a resource pack of materials costing £16 (€24, US $30). No No Roth 2015 PA vs Control ‐ BMI Percentile (Short and Medium Term) No No (although preschool teachers received a collection of games and exercise tasks developed to plan and organise the daily physical activity lessons, and a manual, which were free of costs for the preschools.) No No Yilmaz 2015 PA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Intervention type: Dietary and activity Alkon 2014 DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) Yes "Each of the centres received US $500 for its participation in the study. The intervention centre directors were asked to purchase equipment or supplies to support physical activity.” No No Altarrah 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMIZ (Short Term) No n/a No No Barkin 2012 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Barkin 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Participants received small incentives after each wave of data collection, a total value of US $60 per parent–child dyad over the study period.) Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) – Quick 2018; DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) – Quick 2018 No n/a No No Davis 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a No No Derwig 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes The total cost for the delivery of care for children in the control group was 23,011 euros (97 euros per child) and 20,700 euros (87 euros per child) in the intervention group. The incremental costs of the intervention were estimated at 167 euros per child with overweight. The corresponding ICER for zBMI‐change was 183 euros per 0.1 zBMI unit prevented and for BMI‐change 866 euros per 1 BMI unit prevented. Yes Yes Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Fitzgibbon 2005 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Parents received a US $5.00 grocery store coupon for each homework assignment they completed and turned in.) No No Fitzgibbon 2006 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (If parents completed and returned the homework, they received a small monetary incentive.) No No Fitzgibbon 2011 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) – Fitzgibbon 2011; DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term) – Kong 2016; DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Parents received US $5 for each of the homework assignments that they completed and returned.) No No French 2018 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Long Term) No n/a No No Gato‐Moreno 2021 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a No No Haines 2013 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Participants received US $40 for completing the baseline visit and US $50 for completing the 6‐month follow‐up visit.) No No Haines 2016 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Families received a US $20 gift card for completing each assessment. At the 9‐month follow‐up, a raffle was held where one family won a US $100 gift certificate for attending.) No No Hammersley 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Participants were asked to post photos, recipes, and personal experiences and ideas that they had found helpful for behaviour change, which were relevant to each module. An incentive to post to the group was provided, with one post being selected from each module to receive a gift card.) No No Hammersley 2021 DPA vs DPA – BMI Percentile (Medium Term) No n/a No No Hawkins 2019 DPA vs DPA – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Heerman 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Hodgkinson 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a No No Hughes 2021 NA Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Compensation was US $40 at pre‐test, US $50 at post‐test, US $60 at 6 months, and US $85 at 12 months.) No No Iaia 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – BMI (Long Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a No No Jouret 2009 NA No n/a No No Klein 2010 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes Yes, but only stated that it was low‐cost intervention (about 1000 Euro per kindergarten). No No Kobel 2019 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) No n/a No No Linville (Study 1) 2020 and Linville (Study 2) 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Each participating family was paid a total of US $95 in gift cards (time 1: $25; time 2: $30; time 3: $40) for completing all 3 waves of assessments. No No Malden 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (All six preschools received £200 after the completion of the study to offset any participation costs). No No Manios 2022 NA No n/a No No Morgan 2022 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Morshed 2018 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Each participating family was paid a total of US $95 in gift cards (time 1: US $25; time 2: US $30; time 3: US $40) for completing all 3 waves of assessments.) No No Natale 2017 NA No No (although parents were given small children’s toys as incentives when they returned the surveys. Teachers were given small thank‐you gifts for their help with survey collection.) No No Natale 2021 NA No No Olsen 2020 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Long Term) No n/a No No Ostbye 2012 DPA vs Control‐ zBMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Intervention group: participants were given US $5 for each returned postcard. Control group: retention was encouraged by monetary incentives, up to US $100 for completion of all assessments). No No Penalvo 2015 NA No n/a No No Sherwood 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI Percentile (Short Term) No n/a No No Skouteris 2016 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (A voucher draw (supermarket vouchers worth AUD $50–$250) were used to encourage participant retention.) No No Slusser 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Mothers were offered a healthy snack during classes.) No No Stookey 2017 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes The Basic intervention costs totalled US $640 and the Enhanced intervention costs totalled US $5218. The Basic intervention costs included the cost of WISE training (US $400) and 10 h of a researcher’s time to create the WISE Newsletters (US $23.88/h salary and benefits). This cost corresponds to US $35 per classroom. The Enhanced intervention costs included salary and fringe benefits for 3 facilitators, allowable mileage reimbursements at a rate of US $0.42/mile for travel expenses, and the actual cost of incentives and resources. The facilitator salaries included that of the principal investigator and two facilitators. In total, this corresponds to US $261 per classroom. In‐person facilitation accounted for 25% of the Enhanced intervention costs; travel accounted for 23%; and incentives and resources accounted for 21%. The rest of the time was spent on preparation and miscellaneous tasks. More detail is provided in the paper. No No Sun 2017 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (On completion of each assessment, mothers each received an incentive of one US $10 gift card at T0 and one US $20 gift card at T1 and at T2). No No Tomayko 2016 DPA vs DPA‐ BMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ zBMI (Medium Term); DPA vs DPA‐ BMI Percentile (Medium Term) No No No No Tomayko 2019 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Families were given a US $50 gift card for each data collection visit.) No No Vaughn 2021 DPA vs Control – BMI (Short Term); DPA vs Control – zBMI (Short Term) No n/a No No Walton 2015 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) Yes (incentive‐cost only) No (Families received a US $20 gift card for completing each assessment. At the 9‐month follow‐up assessment, a raffle for a US $100 gift certificate was held to encourage attendance.) No No Ward 2020 DPA vs Control – BMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No Zask 2012 DPA vs Control – zBMI (Medium Term) No n/a No No D = Diet; PA = Physical Activity; DPA = Diet combined with Physical Activity; NA = not included in a meta‐analysis; n/a = not applicable; NR = not reported 6 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (v) Description of 'PROG' of the PROGRESS tool Study ID PROGRESS characteristics reported at baseline Analysed effect of intervention by PROGRESS characteristic? lace of residence P ace/ethnicity/culture/language R ccupation (of parent) O ender/sex G Intervention type: Dietary only De Bock 2012 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: 65.5% without immigrant background, 32.4% with immigrant background, 2% missing. Immigrant background defined as (i) child is a non‐German national; (ii) child’s parents are native speakers of a language other than German; and (iii) child primarily speaks a language other than German at home. Y: 53.1% boys Feng 2004 Place, Gender No Y: Huangshi City, Hubei Province. Y: Employment status of primary caregiver: Working full‐time (FT) 72.5%, working part‐time (PT) 15.6%, unemployed 3.4%, student 3.6%, not working 3.1%, Missing 1.8% Y 50% boys. Fisher 2019 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: Black/African American 90.8%, other 9.2% Y: 94% of fathers had a non‐manual job. Y: 45.4% boys Lumeng 2017 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: white non‐Hispanic 48%; African American non‐Hispanic 29%; Hispanic or other 22%: Y: 49% boys Nezami 2017 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Maternal: White 74.5%, African American 21.6%, Other 3.9% Y: 49.0% boys Swindle 2021 Race, Gender, Education No Y Latino/a 29.5%, White 12.4%, Black 69.2% Y: Working full‐time 17.7%, Working part‐time 19.5%, Not working for pay 62.6%, Missing 0.2% Y 41.9% boys Yoong 2020 Gender No Y 50.4% boys Intervention type: Activity only Adamo 2017 Gender, Education, SES No Y: 53% boys Barber 2016 Place, Race, Gender No Y: children were recruited from schools located in underserved urban areas of Bradford, UK. Y: white 36.8%; South Asian 57.1%; Other 6.1% Y: 47.5% boys Birken 2012 Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: 46.2% boys Bonis 2014 Gender No Y: 50% boys Bonvin 2013 Race (migrant status), Gender, Education Race (migration status), Education: “Adjusting for parental migrant status or educational level did not alter the results (not shown)”. Y: Parental migrant status 57.9%. Migrant status was defined as at least one parent born outside of Switzerland. Y: 51% boys Dennison 2004 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: 96.1% White. Y: 49.4% boys Gao 2019 Race, Gender No Y: White American 34%, Asian American 59%, African American 6% Y: 50% boys Goldfield 2016 Gender, SES No Y: 49% boys Mo‐Suwan 1998 Gender, SES Gender “Although not significant, the results showed a trend of different sex response in weight to exercise” p1008, Tables 2 and 3. Y: 58.2% boys Reilly 2006 Gender Note: Gender (sex) was adjusted for in analysis. Y: 50.1% boys Roth 2015 Place, Race, Gender, SES No Y: Pre‐schools in urban (n=9) and rural (n=32) locations in two regions (Wuerzburg and Kitzingen) in Germany. Y: Migrant status 13.0% (defined by the migration of the child from a foreign country and a parent was not born in Germany or by migration of both parents into Germany or missing German citizenship by both parents). Y: 50.5% boys Yilmaz 2015 Place, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y Ankara, Turkey Y 65.6% boys Intervention type: Dietary and activity Alkon 2014 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES. Note: Education and SES were controlled in the analyses due to significant differences between groups in these characteristics at baseline. Y: White 45.3%, African American 16.3%, Hispanic Latino 17.0%, Asian 8.7%, Other 6.9%, Missing 0.5% Y: Employment status of primary caregiver: Working full‐time (FT) 72.5%, working part‐time (PT) 15.6%, unemployed 3.4%, student 3.6%, not working 3.1%, Missing 1.8% Y: 51.8% boys Altarrah 2018 Race, Occupation, Gender, Educational No Y: maternal ethnicity (96% Emirati vs 4% non‐Emirati). Y: 94% of fathers had a non‐manual job. Y: 57% boys Barkin 2012 Race, Gender, Education No Y: 100% Latino‐American. Country of origin: US 90.1%, Mexico 8%, Guatemala 1%% Y: 49.3% boys. Barkin 2018 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES Gender: Model‐Estimated Child BMI trajectories for I and C groups by baseline age for boys and girls are presented in eFigure 1 Supplement 2 Y: Predominantly Latino (91.4%). Hispanic, Mexican origin 63.8%, Hispanic, Non‐Mexican origin 27.2%, Non‐Hispanic black 5.9%, Non‐Hispanic white 1.0%, Non‐Hispanic other 1.6%, Missing 0.5% Y: Working full‐time 17.7%, Working part‐time 19.5%, Not working for pay 62.6%, Missing 0.2% Y: 48.2% boys Bellows 2013 Race, Gender No Y: 59% Hispanic, 32% White Y: 55% boys Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: 58% white; 23% Hispanic; 8% black; 4% Asian Indian; 2% Asian; 4% other Y: 52% boys Davis 2016 Place, Race, Gender No Y: a rural/non‐metropolitan community Y: Hispanic 57.2%, Non‐Hispanic 42.8; Child race American Indian 38.3%, White 59%, Other 2.7% Y: 52.6% boys Derwig 2021 Gender No Y: ‘Normal weight’ category: 51.7%, ‘Overweight’: 47.3% boys Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 Place, Race, Gender No Harlem, NY, US Y: Non‐Hispanic black 37.4%, Hispanic/ Latino 53.9%, Other/ multiracial 8.7%. Y 48.9% boys Fitzgibbon 2005 Place, Race, Gender, Education Race, Gender Reports (p 622‐623) change in BMI for children in the I and C groups for boys and girls separately and also Black children compared with all children. Y: Archdiocese of Chicago Y: Significant difference between Intervention and Control groups, hence presented here separately. Intervention: Black 99.0%, Latino 0%, Multiracial 1.0%. Control: Black 80.7%, Latino 12.7%, Multiracial 6.6%. Y 49.9% boys Fitzgibbon 2006 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Archdiocese of Chicago Y: Significant difference between Intervention and Control groups, hence presented here separately. Intervention: Black 15.8%, Latino 73.3%, Multi‐racial/ other 10.9%. Control: Black 6.5%, Latino 89.4%, Multi‐racial/other 4.0%. (Also assessed Parent Acculturation). Y 50.6% boys Fitzgibbon 2011 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: 94% Black, 3% Latino, 3% Multiracial/other Y: 36% employed full time Y: 47% boys. French 2018 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Non‐Hispanic White 12.6%, Non‐Hispanic Black 18.4%, Hispanic, any race 58.4%, Multiracial 8.4%, Other 2.3% Y: Full time employment 29.8%, Part time employment 27.7%, Not working for pay 42.5% Y: 48.1% boys Gato‐Moreno 2021 Place, Gender No Y: rural and urban areas of Malaga Y: 53.6% boys Manios 2022 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Greater Boston area Y: 34% black, 52% Hispanic and 14% other. Y: 52.3% boys Haines 2016 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Boston area Y: 22% black, 59% Hispanic and 19% other. Y: 44% boys Hammersley 2019 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: the Illawarra, Southern and South‐Western Sydney, Southern Highlands, and Shoalhaven areas of New South Wales and Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Y: Aboriginal 6%, Torres Strait Islander 0%, neither 92%, not answered 2%. Y: 50% boys Hammersley 2021 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander 3.3% Y: Employment status in last week. Salary earner 71.4%; Absent on paid leave 8.3%; Unpaid work 6.4%; Did not have a job 13.8%; Don’t know 0.2% Y: 52.4% boys Hawkins 2019 Race, Gender No Y: African American (n=7) 44%; Caucasian (n=8) 50%; Other/Mixed (n=1) 6% Y: 50% boys (n=8) Heerman 2019 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Nashville, TN, US Y: All were Hispanic Y: Employment status. Working full time, 27.4%; Unemployed 6.8%; Homemaker/ stay at home parent 65.0%; Full‐time student 0.9%; Y: 46.2% boys Hodgkinson 2019 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, SES No Y: Lancashire, UK Y Asian 12.3%, Black 2.4%, White 82.7%, Other 2.4%. Y: Paid employment: None 49.4%, Part‐time 42.0%, Full‐time 8.6%. (Please also see SES) Y: 50.6% boys Hughes 2021 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: 2 sites in US. An urban city (Houston, Texas) and a rural agricultural community (Paso, Washington). Y: Mothers’ place of birth. Central America Urban 18.7%, Rural 1.4%; Mexico Urban 62.5%, Rural 88.8%; US Urban 12.5%, Rural 7.0%; Other (South America, Puerto Rico) Urban 3.6%, Rural 0%; Not reported Urban 2.7%, Rural 2.8% Y: Employment status. Only report on ‘currently employed’: Urban 33.9%, Rural 42.6%. Y: Urban 44.6% boys, Rural 55.2% boys Iaia 2017 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: Cesena, Forlì‐Cesena, Italy Y: Italian 91.2%; Foreign 8.8%. Y: Employment status. Mother: Working full‐time 44.9%; Working part‐time 31.7%; Unemployed 23.3% Father: Working full‐time 92.1%; Working part‐time 5.1%; Unemployed 2.8% Y: 52% boys Jouret 2009 Place, Gender Place : The effect of EPIPOI‐1 vs EPIPOI‐2 was reported separately (Table 2) for schools ‘in underprivileged areas’ compared with schools ‘‘not in underprivileged areas’. No significant effect. Y: Urban and Rural areas in Haute‐Garonne Department, France. Both urban and rural areas included schools ‘in underprivileged areas’ but unclear on % in each. Y: Two intervention (EPIPOI) groups. EPIPOI‐1 46.9% boys, EPIPOI‐2 52.1% boys. (Note: there was a matched control group, not randomised) Klein 2010 Gender Gender: Page e127. “ Decrease of the BMI in the IG intervention group occurred only in boys, but no gender‐specific differences in the other (CG) intervention group (data not shown)” Y: 54% boys Kobel 2019 Race (migration status), Gender Race (migration status) The significant decrease in BMI percentile in intervention and increase in control was lost when adjusting for migration status. Y Migration background defined as having at least one parent who was born abroad or if the child was spoken to in a language other than German in the first three years of their life. 33.4% Y: 52.3% boys Linville (Study 1) 2020 and Linville (Study 2) 2020 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Study 1 (n=65): American Native 6%,Asian/Pacific Islander 3%, Latinx/Latina/Hispanic 37%, Mixed race 2%, White 49%. Study 2 (n=27): American Native 4% (one child), Latinx/Latina/Hispanic 89%, Mixed race 7%. Y: Study 1: 48% boys. Study 2: 52% boys. Malden 2019 Place, Gender No Y: Glasgow, UK (one of the most socioeconomically deprived areas in Western Europe, with over a third of the cities’ children estimated to be living in poverty) Y: 60% boys Manios 2022 (multi‐country study) Place, Race (native vs non‐native), Gender, Education Race, Education (results in Table 2). The effect of the intervention did not vary by these PROGRESS factors. Multi‐country trial: Belgium, Bulgaria, Germany, Greece, Poland, and Spain Y: Children were categorised as ‘native’ (90%) if both biological parents were born in the country where the study took place; all other children as ‘non‐native’ (10%). Y: 52% boys Morgan 2022 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education SES No Y: Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander 3.2%, born in Australia 87.2% Y: Employment status: employed full‐time 89.6%. Y: 60.8% boys Morshed 2018 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Black or African American 33.0%, White 57.0%, Other 7.3%, or unknown/ not reporting race 2.8% Y: 54.7% boys Natale 2017 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Miami‐Dade County, US Y: Hispanic Cuban 15.9%, Other Hispanic 42.3%, Non‐Hispanic Black 29.4%, Non‐Hispanic White 2.9%, Other 9.5%. Y: 49.9% boys Natale 2021 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Urban and rural sites Y: Hispanic Cuban 20.5%, Other Hispanic 43.5%, Non‐Hispanic Black 25.2%, Non‐Hispanic White 4.9%, Other 5.8%. Y: 47.5% boys Olsen 2020 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: Greater Copenhagen (Denmark) area Y: parental ethnicity (Danish, or first, second, or third‐generation immigrants, including family reunification) was obtained from the Danish Health Visitor's Child Health Database (data not presented) and used as a covariate in the analysis. Y: parental employment status (unemployed, or employed) was obtained from the Danish Health Visitor's Child Health Database (data not presented) and used as a covariate in the analysis. Y: 59.7% boys Ostbye 2012 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Triangle and Triad regions of North Carolina, US Y: Mother: White 75.2%, Black 21.8%, Other races 3%. Hispanic ethnicity 4.8%. Y: 55.8% boys Penalvo 2015 Data collected but not reported: Place, Gender, Education, SES Gender “No sex differences were observed” (p1530). Y: Place of birth: Madrid, Rest of Spain, Europe, Latin America. Place of birth data were not reported but were used to assess the effect of the intervention on the primary outcome KAH (but not BMI) ‐ see Figure 1. Gender data were not reported but were used to assess the effect of the intervention on the primary outcome KAH (but not BMI) ‐ see Figure 1. Sherwood 2015 Place, Race, Gender Y: the greater Minneapolis–St. Paul area, US Y: Race: White 80%. Ethnicity: Hispanic 7%. Y: 55% boys Skouteris 2016 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES Y: Victoria, Australia Y Location of parent's birth: Australia or New Zealand 74.3%, Europe 3.5%, Asia 9.4%, Other 11.1%, Missing 1.7% Y: Parental occupation: Stay‐at‐home parent, 42.7%, Working 52.6%, Maternity leave 1.2%, Student 2.3% Missing 1.2% Currently in paid employment: Yes 50.3% No 48.5% Missing 1.2% Work FT or PT: Full‐time 4.1% Part‐time 42.1% Missing 53.8% Y 49.7% boys Slusser 2012 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Los Angeles, US Y: Child birthplace: Mexico or Central America 8%, US 92%. Mother birthplace: Mexico 80%, Central America 17%, US 3%. Father birthplace: Mexico 76%, Central America 21%, US 3%. Y 43.8% boys Stookey 2017 Gender No Y 45.6% boys (calculated from raw data available online in Additional file No 6). Sun 2017 Race, Gender, Education No Y All participants had a mother who identified herself as Chinese and living in US. ( Their mean acculturation score was 1.92 (SD 0.31) suggesting low acculturation.) Y 53.1% boys Tomayko 2016 Place, Race, Gender, Education No All participants lived on or near an American Indian tribal reservation in Wisconsin, US Y Child: American Indian 92%, White 2.7%, Other 2.3%, Unknown 2.0% Y 53.3% boys Tomayko 2019 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES NoSES “Food secure children in the intervention arm (Wellness Journey) had a loss of −0.07 BMI z‐score, whereas food insecure children in the intervention arm had a gain of 0.12 BMI z‐score (non‐significant).” P56 All participants lived on or near an American Indian (AI) tribal reservation in US (rural) or were registered with an urban clinic serving primarily a AI population (urban). Y Child Race: American Indian/ Alaskan Native 86.7%, White 17.2%, Other 2.4% Child ethnicity: Hispanic/Latino 17.8% Y 50.2% boys Vaughn 2021 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y Race: White 46.4%, Black or African American 36.3%, Other 17.4%. [Other includes American Indian, Alaskan Native, Asian, more than one race, other (write in), and prefer not to answer.] Ethnicity: Latino 8.6% Y 50.8% boys Walton 2015 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y Race/ ethnicity: White 66.7%, Black 2.0%, Latin American 6.3%, Asian/South Asian 25.0%. Y 43.8% boys Ward 2020 Race, Gender No Y Race: Black or African American 63.3%, White 27.2%, Other 9.5%, Hispanic or Latino 4.1%. Y 49.6% boys Zask 2012 Place, Gender No Y NSW North Coast area, Australia Y 51.7% boys. SES = socioeconomic status 7 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (vi) Description of 'RESS' of the PROGRESS tool Study ID PROGRESS characteristics reported at baseline PROGRESS analysed for impact? R eligion E ducation S ES S ocial capital Intervention type: Dietary only De Bock 2012 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: maternal education level: low 16.3%; middle 55.7% and high 21.2% (6.6% missing) Y: a proxy for SES was estimated using mother's self‐report of the highest level of their educational attainment. Feng 2004 Place, Gender No Fisher 2019 Race, Gender, Occupation, Education No Y: less than high school 26%, high school 35.3%, more than high school 38.7% Lumeng 2017 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Less than high school 15%; high school diploma or equivalent 33%; some college courses but no degree 37%; 2‐y college degree 10%; 4‐y college degree or more 4% Y: Family income‐to‐needs ratio (calculated by dividing the income by the federal guideline for poverty by family size), mean (SD) by arm: HS 0.88 ± 0.53 HS+POPS 0.84 ± 0.53 HS+POPS+IYS 0.84 ± 0.56 Nezami 2017 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: High school, vocational training, some college 19.6%, college degree or more 80.4% Y: Income US$. <$50,000 17.6%, >or= $50,000 82.4% Swindle 2021 Race, Gender, Education No Parent with no high school degree 19.9% Note: no data but recruitment targeted low‐income families attending Head Start programmes. Also, household food insecurity data was collected and use in the analysis, but data not reported. Yoong 2020 Gender No Intervention type: Activity only Adamo 2017 Gender, Education, SES No Y: 73% to University level; 27% other Y: 66% Household income > Canadian $100K, 19% $30‐99K, 16% <$30K Barber 2016 Place, Race, Gender No Birken 2012 Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: Mother completed university degree 84.1% Bonis 2014 Gender No Bonvin 2013 Race (migrant status), Gender, Education Race (migration status), Education: “Adjusting for parental migrant status or educational level did not alter the results (not shown)”. Y: Parental low educational level 17.5% (defined as at least one parent with nine years or less of education). Dennison 2004 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: Maternal: high school 11.6%, some college 23.4%, college degree 26.0%, postgraduate degree 35.1%. Paternal: high school 23.4%, some college 27.3%, college degree 26.0%, postgraduate degree 20.8%. Gao 2019 Race, Gender No Goldfield 2016 Gender, SES No Y: Household income, Canadian $ n (%) control; n (%) intervention. Less than $20,000 0 (0); 3 (7.5); $20,000–29,999 0 (0); 2 (5.0); $30,000–39,999 0 (0); 1 (2.5); $40,000–49,999 0 (0); 2 (5.0); $50,000–99,999 7 (16.3); 3 (7.5); More than $100,000 25 (58.1); 17 (42.5); Refuse to answer 11 (25.6); 12 (30.0) Mo‐Suwan 1998 Gender, SES Gender: “ Although not significant, the results showed a trend of different sex response in weight to exercise” p1008, Tables 2 and 3. Y: Parental monthly income Thai baht: <5000 baht 4.8%, 5000 to <10000 24.7%, 10000 to <30000 57.1%, >30000 13.3% Reilly 2006 Gender Note: Gender (sex) was adjusted for in analysis. Roth 2015 Place, Race, Gender, SES No Y: SES (according to Winkler‐Index to categorize socio‐economic status (SES) based on parental school and professional education, professional position and net household income) : Low 21.5%, Middle 50.1%, High 28.4%. Yilmaz 2015 Place, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y Maternal education: Primary school 62.5%, High school 32.5%, University 5.0%. Paternal education: Primary school 9.4%, High school 81.3%, University 9.3%. Y Income of families (US$). <10,000 0%, 10,000‐15,000 34.7%, 15,001‐20,000 54.3%, >20,000 11.0% Intervention type: Dietary and activity Alkon 2014 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES. Note: Education and SES were controlled in the analyses due to significant differences between groups in these characteristics at baseline. Y: Parent education (primary caregiver): Less than high school 33.9%, High school and higher 65.4%, Missing 0.7% Y: method: if >100% of the US Federal Poverty Guidelines (FPG) were deemed to be in poverty . 29.5% between 100‐200% above FPG, 35.9% above 200% FPG (remaining data missing). Altarrah 2018 Race, Occupation, Gender, Educational No Y: 28% of mothers had degree level education (and 97% had a domestic helper). Barkin 2012 Race, Gender, Education No Y: Parental education: <High school 65.3%, Greater or equal to high school but less than college level 29.3%, Greater or equal to college level 5.3%. Barkin 2018 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES Gender: Model‐Estimated Child BMI trajectories for I and C groups by baseline age for boys and girls are presented in eFigure 1 Supplement 2 <High school diploma 61.3%, Greater or equal to a High school diploma 38.7% Y: Household income US$. <14,999 28.5%, 15,000‐24,999 28.2%, 25,000‐34,999 12.5%, 35,000‐49,999 >50,000 0.6% 42.6% of families reported food insecurity. Bellows 2013 Race, Gender No Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: “Most well educated (55% with bachelor's degree or higher). Y: “84% had middle to high family affluence” Davis 2016 Place, Race, Gender No Derwig 2021 Gender No Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 Place, Race, Gender No Fitzgibbon 2005 Place, Race, Gender, Education Race, Gender Reports (p 622‐623) change in BMI for children in the I and C groups for boys and girls separately, and also Black children compared with all children Y: Parental years of education: approx. overall mean = 12.6. Intervention mean 12.4 (SD 1.8), Control mean 12.7 (SD 1.7) Fitzgibbon 2006 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Parental years of education: approx. overall mean = 11.0. Intervention mean 11.3 (SD 3.6), Control mean 10.6 (SD 3.7) Fitzgibbon 2011 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: mean 12.3 years Y: only median income US $15,000 reported. French 2018 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: <High school 33.3%, High school 22.1%, Some college 14.2%, Technical degree 11.4%, Bachelor's degree 11.6%, Advanced degree 7.3% Y: Annual household income < or equal US $14,999 37.6%; $15,000‐24, 999 25.3%; $25,000‐34,999 18%; $35,000‐44,999 9.9%; $45,000‐64,999 9.2% Gato‐Moreno 2021 Place, Gender No Haines 2013 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: < high school 16.8%, high school graduate 37.4%, and >college 45.8% Y: < US $ 20000 55.1%, 20001 to 50000 34.7% and >50000 10.2%. Haines 2016 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Parental education. Less than high school 39.8%, High school graduate 17.6%, Some college or more 42.7%. Y: Household income US$ 20,000 or less 46.1%, 20,001 to $50,000 40.9%, >$50,000 13.0% Hammersley 2019 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Highest level of education of the participating parent. Not University qualified 35%, University qualified 63%, Currently studying 2% Y: Participating parent's income after tax (Aus $), <$580/week 50%, $580‐$1240/week 36%, >$1240/week 14% Hammersley 2021 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y University or other tertiary education 70.3% Y Annual household income before tax. Less than US$ $80,000 18.90%, $80,000 plus 77.36%, Don’t know 3.7% Hawkins 2019 Race, Gender No Heerman 2019 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Some high school or less 48.7%; High school graduate or more 51.3% Y: Household income. Less than US $10,000 3.4%; $10,000–$19,999 26.5%; $20,000–$34,999 19.7%; $35,000–$49,999 5.1%; $50,000–$74,999 0.9%; Do not know or no answer 44.4% Hodgkinson 2019 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, SES No Y: Socio‐economic group. Professional/ managerial/ technical 14.8%, Skilled/ partially skilled/ unskilled 85.2%. (Please also see Occupation) Hughes 2021 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Highest level of maternal education. Sixth grade or less Urban 12.5%, Rural 29.2%; Eighth grade or less Urban 10.7%, Rural 17.5%; Attended some high school Urban 16.1%, Rural 6.6%; High school graduate Urban 18.8%, Rural 30.7%; Completed technical school Urban 14.3%, Rural 6.6%; Attended some college Urban 12.5%, Rural 3.6%; College graduate Urban 15.2%, Rural 5.8% Y: limited proxy information on employment status reported under ‘Occupation’. Iaia 2017 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: Level of education. Mother: None 1.3%; Primary School 0.8%; Secondary School 17.6%; High School 51.1%; Graduation 29.2% Father: None 1.4%; Primary School 0.9%; Secondary School 33.1%; High School 43.7%; Graduation 21.0% Jouret 2009 Place, Gender Place: The effect of EPIPOI‐1 vs EPIPOI‐2 was reported separately (Table 2) for schools ‘in underprivileged areas’ compared with schools ‘‘not in underprivileged areas’. No significant effect. Klein 2010 Gender Gender Page e127. “Decrease of the BMI in the IG intervention group occurred only in boys, but no gender‐specific differences in the other (CG) intervention group (data not shown)” Kobel 2019 Race (migration status), Gender Race (migration status) The significant decrease in BMI percentile in intervention and increase in control was lost when adjusting for migration status. Linville (Study 1) 2020 and Linville (Study 2) 2020 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y Study 1 (n=65): Highest level of education. ≤11th grade 23%, High school diploma or equivalent 15%; Some college or Advanced qual 25%, University degree 22%, Post graduate degree 14%, Did not report 8%. Study 2 (n=27): Highest level of education. ≤11th grade 63%, High school diploma or equivalent 18%, Some college or Advanced qual 15%, University degree 0%, Post graduate degree 0%, Did not report 5%. Y Study 1 (n=65): Household income US $0 1.5% <$6 000 7.7% $6000‐$15 000 9.2% $15 001‐$20 000 16.9% $20 001‐$25 000 10.8% $25 001‐$30 000 7.7% $30 001‐$35 000 6.2% $35 001‐$40 000 4.6% $40 001‐$45 000 0% $45 001‐$50 000 1.5% $50 001‐$55 000 1.5% $55 001‐$60 000 4.6% >$60 000 16.9% Unknown 3.1% Did not respond 9.2% Study 2 (n=27): <$6 000 14.8% $6000‐$15 000 25.9% $15 001‐$20 000 7.4% $20 001‐$25 000 11.1% $25 001‐$30 000 11.1% $30 001‐$35 000 18.5% $35 001‐$40 000 0% $40 001‐$45 000 0% $45 001‐$50 000 0% $50 001‐$55 000 0% $55 001‐$60 000 3.7% >$60 000 3.7% Unknown 3.7% Did not respond 0% Malden 2019 Place, Gender No Manios 2022 (multi‐country study) Place, Race (native vs non‐native), Gender, Education Race, Education (results in Table 2). The effect of the intervention did not vary by these PROGRESS factors. Data on Mother’s and Father’s education (separately) were collected and used in the analyses (Table 2) to assess whether the effect of the intervention varied by this PROGRESS factor. However, this data is not reported in this paper. Morgan 2022 Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Having post‐school qualifications 92.0%: currently attending an education institution full‐time or part‐time 8.8% (currently not a student 91.2%) Y: Socioeconomic status by population decile for SEIFA Index of Relative Socio‐Economic Advantage and Disadvantage : 1‐2 lowest 1.6%, 3‐4 27.2%, 5‐6 38.4%, 7‐8 27.2%, 9‐10 highest 5.6% Morshed 2018 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Mother’s highest grade of school completed: some high school, high school graduate 14%, some college/ technical/ vocational school 37%, College or University graduate 31%, Graduate or professional school 18% Y: Annual household income from all sources US$ (dollars), Under 30,000 39%, 30,000 to 74,999 36%, Over 75,000 25% Natale 2017 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Caregiver level of education: Less than 12th grade 29.7%, completed high school 21.1%, completed education beyond high school 33.2%, missing 16.1%. Natale 2021 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y: Caregiver level of education: Less than 12th grade 5.3%, completed high school 16.7%, completed education beyond high school 66.6%, missing 31.4% Olsen 2020 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education No Y: parental highest education (primary school or above primary school) was obtained from the Danish Health Visitor's Child Health Database (data not presented) and used as a covariate in the analysis. [In one municipality, only children with maternal low educational level (≤ 10 years) were selected from the administrative birth forms]. Ostbye 2012 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y: Mother education: High school graduate or less 11.5%, some college 20.3%, college degree 42.0%, graduate school 26.2%. Y: Household income per year US$: Up to 15,000 10%, 15001 to 30000 8.8%, 30001 to 45000 9.0%, 45001 ‐ 60000 15.0%, 60001 or more 55.8%. Penalvo 2015 Data collected but not reported: Place, Gender, Education, SES Gender “No sex differences were observed” (p1530). . Y: Parental education level is defined as low (none or primary school), medium (completed high school), or high (university studies). Parental education data are not reported but were used to assess the effect of the intervention on the primary outcome KAH (but not BMI) ‐ see Figure 1. Y: Income status <22,500 vs >22,500. Cut‐off defined according to the Spanish average annual wage. Income data are not reported but were used to assess the effect of the intervention on the primary outcome KAH (but not BMI) ‐ see Figure 1. Sherwood 2015 Place, Race, Gender No Skouteris 2016 Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Education, SES No Y Highest level of parental education: Year 11 or below 11.1%, Year 12 or equivalent 9.9%, Certificate/diploma 20.5%, Bachelor degree or higher 57.3%, Missing 1.2% Y Parental monthly income (AUD$): <450,000 16.4%, 45,001–85,000 36.3%, 85,001–125,000 26.3%, >125,000 17.5%, Missing: 3.5% Slusser 2012 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y Maternal education in years Mean 9.0 (SD 3.8). Note: no data but recruitment targeted low‐income families. Stookey 2017 Gender No Sun 2017 Race, Gender, Education No Maternal: number of years of education Mean 13 (SD 3.5) Note: no data but recruitment targeted low‐income families attending Head Start programmes. Tomayko 2016 Place, Race, Gender, Education No Y Educational level: High school or less 20.7%, Some college 36.0%, Completed college and beyond 25.3%, Unknown 18.0% Tomayko 2019 Place, Race, Gender, Education, SES SES “Food secure children in the intervention arm (Wellness Journey) had a loss of −0.07 BMI z‐score, whereas food insecure children in the intervention arm had a gain of 0.12 BMI z‐score (non‐significant).” P56 Y Educational level: High school or less 37.6%, Some college or associated degree 52.2%, College degree or post‐graduate 10.2% Y Family income US$: <5,000 30.1%, 5,000–19,999 28.2%, 20,000–34,999 21.3%, ≥35,000 20.4%. Food insecurity prevalence was 61%. Vaughn 2021 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Highest level of Education: Some college or less 38.2%, Associate degree 12.2%, College degree or higher 44.4%. Family income US$: <30,000 28.1%, 30,000–59,999 18.3%, >60,000 37.9%, Prefer not to answer 15.7% Walton 2015 Race, Gender, Education, SES No Y Parental education obtained: High school education or less 18.8%, Some college/ university 16.7%, College graduate 22.9%, University graduate 22.9%, Post graduate training or degree 16.7% Y Total household income US$: <20,000 16.7%, 20,000–49,999 20.8%, 50,000–99,999 45.8%, ≥$100,000 16.7%. Food insecurity data was collected but not reported. Ward 2020 Race, Gender No Zask 2012 Place, Gender No SES = socioeconomic status 8 Overview of synthesis and included studies: (vii) Characteristics of studies excluded from meta‐analysis Study ID Comparison Reported outcome (s) Outcome(s) not included in meta‐analyses Results as reported by the study authors Direction of effect Comments Intervention type: Dietary only De Bock 2012 D vs Control BMI – Short Term; BMI – Medium Term BMI – Short Term; BMI – Medium Term We also found no significant intervention effect on BMI. No effect Follow‐up data statistics not reported. Feng 2004 D vs Control BMI – Long Term BMI – Long Term The incidence of overweight children (5.6%) and obese children (3.9%) in the intervention group were significantly lower than those in the control group (8.3%) and (8.1%), which is significant (p= 0.86>0.75) Lower prevalence of overweight/obesity in intervention group. No usable data ‐ Endpoint % overweight children Lumeng 2017 D vs D BMIZ‐ Medium Term BMIZ‐ Medium Term There was a 2.1% reduction in obesity prevalence in HS+POPS+IYS, a 2.9% reduction in HS+POPS, and a 0.8& increase in HS alone, but differences between study arms did not reach statistical significance. Reduction in BMIZ in both enhanced interventions, though more so in the intervention with primary focus on reducing obesity without the incredible years intervention. No usable data for MA, because there was no standard error or confidence intervals reported so could not estimate the effects. Swindle 2021 D vs D BMI Percentile – Short Term BMI Percentile – Short Term The majority of youth were within normal BMI percentile range at fall and sprint (67.2% and 66.4%), with the overweight (17.3%, 16.8%) and obese (15.6%, 15.9%) categories reporting similar frequencies across time. Approximately 0.9% were in the underweight category at spring and none at fall. There were no significant change in BMI percentile across all youth nor within each treatment condition (Enhanced Mdiff=0.7, SDdiff = 20.7; Basic Mdiff 1.2, SDdiff = 20.7). A linear mixed model nested by classroom whilst controlling for fall BMI, ethnicity, race, parental education, household food insecurity, and classroom turnover found no statistically significant difference in BMI percentile by treatment condition. No effect. Percentage of children in each percentile; within group mean difference only. Intervention type: Activity only Bellows 2013 DPA vs D BMI‐ Medium Term; BMIZ‐ Medium Term BMI Medium Term; BMIZ‐ Medium Term ANOVAs indicated nonsignificant differences between treatment groups in BMI and BMI z score, whether controlling for covariates or not. No effect. No follow‐up data reported. Reilly 2006 PA vs Control BMI – Short Term; BMI – Medium Term; BMIZ‐ Short Term BMI – Short Term; BMI – Medium Term Group allocation had no significant effect on the primary outcome measure at 6 and 12 months. No effect. Only baseline data reported for BMI outcome, BMIZ outcome data included in MA. Intervention type: Dietary and activity Hughes 2021 DPA vs Control BMIZ Short Term; BMIZ Medium Term BMIZ Short Term; BMIZ Medium Term The multilevel analysis on child BMI z‐score showed no signiﬁcant condition x time interaction (F [3,309.37] = 0.18, P = 0.91). Child BMI z‐scores were highly stable over time. The correlations between time points were: pretest to 6‐months (r [160] = 0.94, P <0.001), pretest to 12 months (r[145] = 0.92, P <0.001), and 6 to 12 months (r[125] = 0.95, P <0.001). No effect. Proportion of overweight ‐ No usable data reported. Jouret 2009 DPA vs DPA BMIZ‐ Long Term BMIZ‐ Long Term After the intervention, prevalence of overweight, BMI z‐score, and change in BMI z‐score were significantly lower in intervention groups compared with controls in underprivileged areas. Significant effect on overweight prevalence at the end of the study noted for EPIPOI‐1 in underprivileged areas only. In non‐ underprivileged areas, the gain in BMI Z‐score was lower in EPIPOI‐2 group compared with control and EPIPOI‐1. Reduction in BMI‐Z score in intervention groups, more so for basic strategy in underprivileged areas and reinforced intervention for non‐underprivileged areas. No follow‐up data reported. Slusser 2012 DPA vs Control BMI Medium Term; BMIZ Medium Term; BMI Percentile Medium Term BMI Medium Term Children in the intervention group decreased their BMI z‐scores significantly on average by .20 (SE=.08) compared to children in the control group who increased z scores on average by.04 (SE.09) at one year (p<.05). Main conclusion: Reduction in intervention group. Proportion of overweight /obese for BMI, but there was usable data for BMIZ and percentile which are included in the MA. Penalvo 2015 DPA vs Control BMIZ Medium Term; BMIZ Long Term BMIZ Medium Term; BMIZ Long Term Taking the different durations of the intervention into accountand using CDC criteria for BMI, the prevalence of obese children at the end of the intervention was 1.3% (95% CI: 0.6% to 2.2%) in the control group and 1.1% (95% CI: 0.4% to 1.8%) in the intervention group. Total overweight (including obesity) was 7.4% (95% CI: 5.6% to 9.2%) in the control group and 7% (95% CI: 5.5% to 8.8%) in the intervention group. Although no significant differences were found for BMI or the other measures taking a subsample with a baseline z‐score >1 and a baseline z‐score >2, results were favorable to the intervention group at all time points Prevalence of obesity lower in intervention group, but not statistically significant. No usable data reported. The BMIZ data are only reported in a figure, so it is not possible to extract accurate recordings. Manios 2022 DPA vs Control BMI Percentile Medium Term BMI Percentile Medium Term The intervention had no significant effect on the change in BMI percentile. No effect. Beta data only ‐ no usable data for MA Natale 2017 DPA vs Control BMI Percentile – Long Term BMI Percentile – Long Term There was a statistically significant change in BMI percentile over time based on group assignment. Children in the intervention group had a negative slope (B= ‐1.95, SE = 0.97, p =.04), indicating that they had less of an increase in BMI percentile over time than the control group. Lower BMI increase in intervention group. Beta data for reduction in BMI percentile reported for intervention group only. Natale 2021 DPA vs Control BMI Percentile – Long Term BMI Percentile – Long Term In both phases of the intervention, the overall mean child BMI remained in the healthy range throughout the 4 time points for both intervention and control groups. No effect. No usable data reported. BMI = body mass index; BMIZ= BMI z‐score; D = Diet; PA = Physical Activity; DPA = Diet combined with Physical Activity; MA = meta‐analysis Study designs Thirty (45%) included studies were individually‐randomised trials, and 37 (55%) were cluster‐RCTs (see Supplementary material 2 ). Most of the included studies were two‐arm studies (n = 63, 94%) and four were three‐arm studies (6%). In most cluster‐RCTs, the unit of allocation was the childcare setting (n = 32, 48%); in three studies, it was the classroom (5%); in one, it was child health centres (2%); and in one, the unit was municipalities (2%). For the 30 individually‐randomised trials, the unit of allocation was the family (parent‐child dyad) (n = 30, 45%). Study locations Details of the study location (country) of the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 . Thirty‐seven (55%) studies were conducted in the USA, six in Australia (9%), four each in the UK (6%), Canada (6%) and Germany (6%), and two in Spain (3%). One study each was conducted in Italy, France, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, Turkey, China, Thailand, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). One study was conducted in multiple countries, including Belgium, Bulgaria, Germany, Greece, Poland, and Spain. Based on the World Bank classification of countries by income [ 107 ], 63 studies were conducted in high‐income countries (94%), with four (6%) in upper‐middle‐income countries. No included studies were conducted in lower‐middle‐income countries. Participants Details of the participants in the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 and Table 6 . The included studies varied in size, with the number of randomised participants ranging from 16 to 6426. The mean age range of study samples at baseline was two to three years (some studies included younger or older children too, but provided subgroup data for children aged two to four). The percentage of males in the study samples ranged from 40.7% to 65.6%, except in the study with only 16 participants, where there was only one male (6.3%). Twenty‐six studies (39%) specifically targeted lower socioeconomic status families: 10 studies targeted low‐income families; 12 had Head Start/Sure Start centres as the study sites; two studies took place in some of the most socioeconomically deprived areas of Western Europe; and two targeted American Indians living in rural communities. Indeed, this is the preferred way of addressing health inequalities, i.e. to target the health disparity population exclusively [ 16 ]. Twenty‐one studies (31%) reported on the inclusion or exclusion of children with physical disabilities. Of these, 18 studies either excluded children with physical disabilities or excluded centres that exclusively served children with special needs, while three studies reported that children with physical disabilities were not excluded from their sample. Nineteen studies (28%) reported on the inclusion or exclusion of children with mental disabilities. Of these, sixteen excluded children with mental disabilities and developmental delay, or excluded centres that exclusively served children with special needs (same studies as with physical disabilities). Three reported that children with mental disabilities were not excluded from their sample. Details of where studies excluded children living with disabilities and where interventions were targeted towards children in under‐served/disadvantaged families, settings, and communities are described in Table 6 . Interventions Details of the interventions in the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 and Table 5 . Theory In 37 studies (55%), the intervention was reported to be based on one or more theories, the most common being social cognitive theory (n = 22, 33%). Types of interventions and comparators Of the 67 included studies, seven (10%) studied dietary interventions, 12 (18%) applied activity interventions, and 48 (72%) used a combination of dietary and activity interventions. Most studies (n = 63, 94%) investigated one intervention against a control group. Four studies had three groups: one study assessed two activity interventions versus a control group (Adamo 2017); one study assessed three different types of dietary and activity interventions (Hammersley 2021); one study assessed a combined dietary/activity intervention versus two types of controls (a control group and a 'shadow control' group) (Olsen 2020); and one study compared a dietary intervention alone ('Head Start' plus 'Preschool Obesity Prevention Series') or in combination with the 'Incredible Years Series' programme (an intervention designed to enhance overall parenting skills and confidence; i.e. 'Head Start' plus 'Preschool Obesity Prevention Series' plus 'Incredible Years'), to a control group ('Head Start' alone) (Lumeng 2017). Forty‐five studies (67%) compared a combined dietary and activity intervention with a control group; 12 studies (18%) compared an activity intervention with control; and five studies (7%) compared a dietary intervention with control. Other combinations of comparisons included: four studies (6%) comparing two different types of combined dietary and activity interventions, with most consisting of a more versus less intensive approach; one study (2%) compared a combined dietary/activity intervention to a diet‐only intervention; two (3%) studies compared two dietary interventions; and one study compared an activity intervention to a control, as well as comparing two different activity interventions (one childcare‐only activity intervention, and one with childcare and home components). Duration Forty‐seven interventions (70%) lasted less than nine months; 14 interventions (21%) for a period of between nine months to 15 months, and six interventions (9%) lasted 15 months or longer. The shortest intervention was conducted over one visit and the longest were up to three years. Setting Details of the intervention settings in the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 and Table 5 . Based on the 'main setting' of the intervention, most studies were conducted in childcare settings (n = 26, 39%) and at home (n = 23, 34%), with 10 studies (15%) including equal combinations of home and childcare. Few studies were conducted in community settings (n = 3, 5%) or healthcare settings (n = 5, 7%). Among the 67 included studies, most interventions were delivered as a group, such as a series of workshops on different topics related to improving diet, activity, or both (n = 43, 65%). Around a quarter of interventions were delivered individually, such as receiving individual telephone coaching sessions alongside materials mailed home (n = 15, 23%). The remaining interventions combined group and individual elements (n = 9, 14%). In six studies (9%), the intervention was delivered electronically (online/digital interventions, either exclusively or significantly). Comparators Details of the comparators used in the control groups of the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 and Table 5 . The nature of control groups varied across the 67 included studies. In most (n = 40, 60%), the comparator was “no active intervention” (i.e. reported as no intervention, usual care, or waiting list comparisons). Some studies (n = 20, 30%) included an active comparator where the type of intervention was ineligible for inclusion (e.g. injury prevention intervention, general health concepts, school readiness). As both “no active intervention” and “attention control” interventions were not expected to affect the outcomes, in the meta‐analyses we coded such comparator interventions collectively as “control”. Seven studies (11%) compared the active intervention to the same type of intervention: two studies used 'light touch' diet comparators; four studies used combined 'light touch' diet/activity comparators; and one study's comparator comprised a secondary diet intervention combined with the Incredible Years intervention (an intervention designed to enhance overall parenting skills and confidence [ 253 ]). Outcome measures Details of all outcomes reported in the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 and Table 5 , Table 6 , Table 7 , Table 8 , Table 9 , Table 10 , and Table 11 . One study collected only parent‐/carer‐reported height and weight assessments (Hammersley 2021). The most common measures of adiposity reported were BMI (n = 34, 51%), zBMI (n = 42, 61%), and BMI percentile (n = 17, 25%). Six studies (9%) reported data on serious adverse events (see Table 7 ), five of which stated no adverse events were reported as a result of the intervention. One study reported that one parent fractured an ankle while roller‐skating during an event at a community centre but that no additional intervention‐related adverse events occurred (Barkin 2018). Funding sources Details of funding sources reported in the included studies can be found in Supplementary material 2 . Most studies declared non‐industry funding, such as funding from not‐for‐profit charitable organisations and government institutions (n = 59, 88%). Two studies (3%) declared industry funding from the Danone Institute of Canada (n = 1) and Orogel Spa (n = 1). One study described mixed funding from both industry and not‐for‐profit organisations, including sponsorship received from the Foundation for Science, Health and Education ‐ "la Caixa" Banking Foundation. Four studies (6%) did not report any details on funding (i.e. whether any was received or not) and one study declared that no funding was received. Thirty‐six studies (54%) declared that both the research and writing of the trial reports were completed independently of the funders, including just one study that received some industry sponsorship. One study explicitly reported that the funder played an advisory role in all stages of the study, from design through to write‐up and approval of the manuscript for submission (Barkin 2018). The remaining studies did not report any details on whether research and writing were independent of funders. Implementation factors Economic information Details of economic information reported in the included studies can be found in Table 8 . Only two of 67 studies included a formal economic evaluation. One was for the PIP programme (Preschoolers in the Playground) for children aged 18 months to four years, and the other was for the CCHD programme (Child‐Centered Health Dialogue) for 4‐year‐old children living with normal weight or overweight. Of the remaining 65 studies, four reported on intervention costs beyond any financial incentive costs (for the family, childcare centre, or both) for trial participation. Of the remaining 61 studies, 21 reported financial incentive costs (for the family, childcare centre, or both) for participation in the trial, and one simply reported that preschool teachers received a collection of games and other materials free of cost. These costs would not usually be included in an economic evaluation. Equity and disadvantage: PROGRESS characteristics Details of PROGRESS characteristics reported in the included studies can be found in Table 9 and Table 10 . Every included study collected and reported data at baseline on at least one PROGRESS characteristic (Place of residence, Race, Occupation, Gender, Religion, Education, Socioeconomic status, Social capital). Data on place of residence (including a comparison of urban and rural sites in six studies) were reported by 29 studies (43%); race/ ethnicity/ culture/ language (including migration status in four studies) by 50 studies (75%); occupation of parent(s) by 18 studies (27%); gender/sex in all studies (100%); education level of parent(s) by 42 studies (63%); and socioeconomic status (including food insecurity status in four studies) by 33 studies (49%). None of the studies reported data on religion or social capital. Ten studies (15%) reported on the impact of at least one PROGRESS characteristic on the effectiveness of the intervention (i.e. test for interaction, effect modification, or subgroup analysis). Four studies (6%) assessed the impact of race/ ethnicity/ culture/ language (including migration status); five studies (8%), the impact of gender/sex; two studies (3%) the impact of education level of parent(s); one study (2%), the impact of place; and one study (2%), the impact of socioeconomic status. None of the studies reported on the impact of occupation of parent(s), religion, or social capital. Studies awaiting classification Details of the four studies awaiting classification are reported in Supplementary material 4 . Of these, three studies were initially identified as ongoing studies when the searches were conducted. In the final stages of preparing this review, we checked all ongoing studies to see if any had published their findings on change in BMI. We found that three studies published their findings in 2023 (Alexandrou 2023 [ 254 , 255 ]; Brophy‐Herb 2023 [ 256 , 257 , 258 ]; Gago 2023 [ 259 , 260 , 261 ]); we recategorised these as 'studies awaiting classification'. The remaining study was initially missed in the screening process (confused with another study by the same research team), but during a final check of trial registration numbers before submitting our review, it was identified (Toussaint 2021 [ 262 , 263 ]). Ongoing studies We identified 46 ongoing studies, and details are reported in Supplementary material 5 . Of these, 26 (57%) were conducted in the USA and four (9%) in Canada. Eleven (24%) ongoing studies were conducted in Europe: three in the United Kingdom, two each in Germany, the Netherlands, and Spain, and one each in Portugal and Sweden. Two (4%) ongoing studies were conducted in Australia, one (2%) in Hong Kong, one (2%) in Malaysia, and one (2%) in Mexico. Based on the World Bank classification of countries by income, 44 (96%) of ongoing studies were conducted in high‐income countries and two (4%) in upper‐middle‐income countries. The type of intervention in these ongoing studies was dietary and activity in 29 studies (74%), dietary in six studies (13%), and activity in six studies (13%). Of the six dietary interventions, three focussed on the promotion of water or milk as the preferred beverage of choice, one focussed on healthy snacks or meal preparation, one focussed on low‐energy‐density foods, and one focussed on increasing the consumption of traditional foods of that community. Of the six activity interventions, four focussed on increasing activity levels through play and playing games as part of daily routines in the childcare environment and another also included meaningful parental involvement. One activity intervention focussed on reducing screen time. The interventions in two studies (4%) focussed on a mobile health app, and two other studies (2%) incorporated the use of communication by mobile phone. The main setting of these ongoing studies was childcare centres or kindergartens attached to schools in 30 studies (65%), the home in nine studies (20%), healthcare settings in four studies (9%), and community‐based settings in one study (2%). The main setting in two studies (4%) was unclear. We note that many of the ongoing studies were expected to complete data collection by 2023, and some of these were conducted before 2015. From the information in their trial registration, protocols, or both, they intended to report (primary or secondary outcomes) on change in BMI (or other weight status). Some of these studies have published results of other outcomes or process evaluations. We understand that the COVID‐19 pandemic may have delayed or interrupted intervention delivery and data collection, and the authors' capacity to write up study findings for publication. We anticipate incorporating ongoing studies and those awaiting classification in future updates of this review. Excluded studies Details of the 123 excluded studies are reported in Supplementary material 3 . We excluded 53 studies because they did not measure an outcome of interest, of which one study measured the percentage of body fat but not BMI. We excluded 28 studies as they had an ineligible population. Of these, 16 studies targeted children with a mean age of over four years; eight targeted children with a mean age of under two years; three focussed solely on children living with overweight or obesity; and one focussed on children with Down’s syndrome. We excluded 34 studies as they had an ineligible study design. Of these, 19 studies were not RCTs; 11 were RCTs but did not contain at least three clusters per arm; and in four studies, the last follow‐up was less than 12 weeks from the start of the intervention. We excluded eight studies as the aims of their interventions were ineligible: five were food aid interventions aimed at children who were undernourished; one study aimed to increase the resilience of childcare centres; one study aimed to reduce ‘picky eating’; and one study aimed to improve parental perceptions of child weight status. We excluded Natale 2014 [ 264 ], which was an included study in the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ], due to an ineligible study design: it had fewer than three clusters per arm (the inclusion criterion for a minimum of clusters per arm was tightened for this review). Of note, the excluded studies listed in this review do not include age‐relevant studies (i.e. studies in children aged two to four) that were already excluded in the Brown 2019 review [ 82 ], unless they were identified again by the searches conducted for this new review, screened by authors of this review, and were eventually deemed ineligible. Risk of bias in included studies We present traffic‐light plots of the RoB 2 assessments (domain‐level judgements and overall) for each individual result alongside each study result in the relevant forest plots. Since each of the studies may have contributed to more than one meta‐analysis, we assessed the risk of bias in 110 results. Overall, 16 (15%) were judged as low risk of bias, 41 (37%) as having ‘some concerns’, and 53 (48%) as high risk of bias. Most judgements of high risk of bias were due to missing outcome data (n = 39, 33%). Our risk‐of‐bias assessment data, including answers to signalling questions, are available via Figshare (doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27850320). Results of our assessments using the preliminary ROB‐ME tool for risk of bias due to missing evidence are presented in Table 12 . We judged 14 meta‐analyses as having 'some concerns' due to the potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results (traditional publication bias), although we identified no known missing results in the included studies for the outcome. We judged 17 meta‐analyses to be at high risk of bias due to missing results (e.g. studies that were otherwise relevant but lacked usable data for meta‐analysis), which had the potential to impact on the synthesised effect estimate. 9 Assessment of risk of bias in included studies due to missing evidence (ROB‐ME) Outcome Risk of bias Supporting statements Dietary and activity interventions vs. control BMI (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI (Medium Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 121 participants. In Slusser 2012, authors reported BMIZ data only and not BMI, though narrative results from 121 participants show that there was a reduction in BMI in the intervention group compared to children in control group. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMI (Long Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Short Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 144 participants. In Hughes 2021, authors reported proportion of overweight and obese children rather than BMIZ scores. Correlations between time points were reported and suggested no effect of the intervention on BMIZ of children. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMIZ (Medium Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 2206 participants. In Hughes 2021, authors reported proportion of overweight and obese children rather than BMIZ scores. Correlations between time points were reported and suggested no effect of the intervention on BMIZ of children. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. In Penalvo 2015, BMIz data are only reported in a figure, so it is not possible to extract accurate recordings. Authors reported that prevalence of obesity is lower in intervention group, but not statistically significant. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMIZ (Long Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 2062 participants. In Penalvo 2015, BMIz data are only reported in a figure, so it is not possible to extract accurate recordings. Authors reported that prevalence of obesity is lower in intervention group, but not statistically significant. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMI Percentile (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI Percentile (Medium Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 6268 participants. In Manios 2022, beta data only – not in usable format for meta‐analysis. Authors state no effect of intervention on BMI across groups. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMI Percentile (Long Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 2,036 participants. In Natale 2017, beta data for reduction in BMI percentile reported so cannot determine mean difference between groups. Authors state lower BMI percentile increase in intervention group. In Natale 2021, no usable data is reported, with only BMI percentile reported in graph where an accurate recording could not be taken. Authors state no effect of intervention on BMI percentile. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. Activity interventions vs. control BMI (Short Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 506 participants. In Reilly 2005, only baseline data reported for BMI outcome, BMIZ outcome data included in MA. Authors state group application had no significant effect on the outcome. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMI (Medium Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 506 participants. In Reilly 2005, only baseline data reported for BMI outcome, BMIZ outcome data included in MA. Authors state group application had no significant effect on the outcome. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMI (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Medium Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI Percentile (Medium Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI Percentile (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted Dietary interventions vs. control BMI (Short Term) High Serious concerns over results missing from included studies. Data are missing from 103 participants. In De Bock 2011, no follow up data were reported. Authors state no significant intervention effect on BMI. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. BMI (Medium Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion and data were missing from the 103 participants. In De Bock 2011, no follow up data were reported. Authors state no significant intervention effect on BMI. BMI (Long Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion and data were missing from the 2,238 participants. In Feng 2005, only endpoint % overweight children reported. Authors state no difference in growth/weight status between intervention and control group. BMIZ (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Medium Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Short Term) High Potential for data missing from 51 participants. In Nezami 2017, authors state in the measures that BMI percentile will also be calculated, though do not state this in analysis or results but do calculate BMIZ. Authors state no significant differences between groups on BMI. Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI Percentile (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted Dietary and activity interventions vs. dietary and activity Interventions BMI (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI (Medium Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included in this analysis. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included in this analysis. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Medium Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included in this analysis. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMIZ (Long Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion and data were missing from the 1,253 participants. In Jouret 2009, no follow up statistics were reported. Authors state that after the intervention, prevalence of overweight, BMI z‐score, and change in BMI z‐score were significantly lower in intervention groups compared with controls in underprivileged areas. Significant effect on overweight prevalence at the end of the study noted for EPIPOI‐1 in underprivileged areas only. In non‐ underprivileged areas, the gain in BMI Z‐score was lower in EPIPOI‐2 group compared with control and EPIPOI‐1. BMI Percentile (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Medium Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included in this analysis. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI Percentile (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted Dietary and activity interventions vs. dietary interventions BMI (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI (Medium Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion and data were missing from the 201 participants. In Bellows 2013, no follow up statistics were reported. Authors stated nonsignificant differences between treatment groups in BMI and BMI z‐score, whether controlling for covariates or not. BMI (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Medium Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion and data were missing from the 201 participants. In Bellows 2013, no follow up statistics were reported. Authors stated nonsignificant differences between treatment groups in BMI and BMI z‐score, whether controlling for covariates or not. BMIZ (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted Activity interventions vs. activity interventions BMI (Short Term) Some concerns Some concerns over potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results, as only one study included in this analysis. No known missing results in the included studies for this outcome. BMI (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted Dietary interventions vs. dietary interventions BMI (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Short Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMIZ (Medium Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion. In Lumeng 2013, there was no standard error or confidence intervals reported so could not estimate the effects. Authors state reduction in BMIZ in both enhanced interventions, though more so in the intervention with primary focus on reducing obesity without the incredible years intervention. BMIZ (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Short Term) High Serious concerns ‐ no meta‐analysis conducted, as only one study was eligible for inclusion and data were missing from the 420 participants. In Swindle 2021, percentage of children in each percentile only reported (within group mean difference only). Authors reported no effect of intervention on BMI. BMI Percentile (Medium Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI Percentile (Long Term) N/A No meta‐analysis was conducted BMI = body mass index; BMIZ = BMI z‐score; MA = meta‐analysis Synthesis of results See Table 1 ; Table 2 ; Table 3 . Overview of evidence Of the 67 included studies, we were able to include 56 studies (84%, 21,404 participants) in the meta‐analyses. Of these, 28 reported BMI, 38 reported zBMI, and 13 reported BMI percentile. For each outcome, we provide a summary forest plot presenting the results for all comparisons and all three time points where possible. Forest plots displaying results of individual studies can be found in each comparison section. We focus on findings for average effects across studies within each subset. Importantly, where there were multiple studies in a meta‐analysis, heterogeneity was generally high. For completeness, absolute measures of BMI/zBMI/BMI percentile for intervention and controls groups at baseline and different follow‐up time points (as reported in the trial reports) for studies included in the meta‐analyses described in the abstract are provided in Table 13 . 10 Absolute measures of BMI/zBMI/BMI percentile, as reported in the trial reports, for studies included in the meta‐analyses Analysis No. of studies/ Time of end measure Intervention ‐ Baseline measure Intervention ‐ End measure Control ‐ Baseline measure Control ‐ End measure Comparison: Dietary interventions versus control BMI (Short term) N=1 Fisher 2019 12 weeks 16.5 (SD 2.4) 16.4 (95% CI 16.2, 16.6) 16.5 (SD 1.8) 16.4 (95% CI 16.2, 16.6) zBMI (Short term) N=2 Fisher 2019 Nezami 2017 12 weeks 3 months 6 months 0.48 (SD 1.2) 0.3 (SD 1.02) 0.3 (SD 1.02) 0.6 (95% CI 0.48, 0.73) 0.38 (95% CI ‐0.06, 0.83 0.4 (95% CI ‐0.05, 0.84) 0.6 (SD 0.98) 0.49 (SD 0.9) 0.49 (SD 0.9) 0.57 (95% CI 0.45, 0.68) 0.5 (95% CI 0.09, 0.91) 0.43 (95% CI ‐0.01, 0.87) zBMI (medium term) N=1 Yoong 2020 1 year 0.44 (SD 1.01) 0.41 (SD 0.91) 0.48 (SD 0.94) 0.63 (SD 1.05) BMI percentile (short term) N=1 Fisher 2019 12 weeks 61.9 (SD 28.7) 67.3 (95% CI 63.6,70.9) 66.2 (SD 26.3) 66.2 (95% CI 62.7,69.8) Comparison: Physical activity interventions versus control BMI (Short term) N=6 Adamo 2017 a Adamo 2017 b Bonis 2014 Dennison 2004 Gao 2019 Goldfield 2016 Mo‐Suwan 1998 6 months 6 months 6 months 6 months 13 weeks 6 months 8 months 16.0 (SD 1.4) 16.0 (SD 1.4) 16.6 (SD 2.0) 15.9 (SE 0.3) 15.3 (SD 1.1) 16.3 (SE 0.3) 16.3 (SD 2.3) 16.0 (SD 1.6) 15.8 (SD 1.4) 16.3 (SD 2.1) NR [change ‐0.24, SE 0.25] 15.4 (SD 1.4) 16.1 (SE 0.3) 15.8 (SD 2.5) 16.1 (SD 1.1) 16.1 (SD 1.1) 16.7 (SD 2.2) 15.9 (SE 0.3) 15.1 (SD 1.2) 16.1 (SE 0.2) 16.4 (SD 2.2) 15.6 (SD 1.3) 15.6 (SD 1.3) 16.3 (SD 1.9) NR [change ‐0.12, SE 0.30] 15.3 (SD 1.4) 16.1 (SE 0.2) 15.9 (SD 2.3) a Childcare and home intervention; b childcare intervention only BMI (Medium term) N=1 Bonvin 2013 9 months 16.3 (SD 1.4) 16.1 (SD 1.3) 16.2 (SD 1.2) 16.2 (SD 1.3) zBMI (Short term) N=3 Dennison 2004 Goldfield 2016 Reilly 2006 6 months 6 months 6 months 0.18 (SE 0.16) 0.6 (SE 0.1) 0.39 (SD 0.98) NR [change 0.19, SE 0.21] 0.52 (SE 0.1) 0.46 (SD 1.03) 0.26 (SE 0.2) 0.5 (SE 0.1) 0.41 (SD 1.0) NR [change 0.37, SE 0.21] 0.54 (SE 0.1) 0.43 (SD 1.08) zBMI (Medium term) N=4 Barber 2016 Birken 2012 Reilly 2006 Yilmaz 2015 12 months 12 months 12 months 9 months 0.6 (SD 0.1) 0.66 (SD 1.18) 0.39 (SD 0.98) ‐0.19 (SD 1.12) 0.2 (SD 1.2) 0.38 (SD 1.06) 0.41 (SD 1.05) ‐0.13 (SD 1.05) 0.8 (SD 1.1) 0.3 (SD 0.83) 0.41 (SD 1.0) ‐0.22 (SD 0.81) 0.3 (SD 1.2) 0.14 (SD 0.93) 0.43 (SD 1.1) ‐0.15 (SD 0.95) BMI percentile (Short term) N=1 Roth 2015 5.5 months 46.5 (SD 26.2) NR [ Percentile change ‐0.21, SD 12.87] 48,5 (SD 25.4) NR [ Percentile change ‐1.32, SD 13.28] BMI percentile (medium term) N=1 Roth 2015 14 months 46.5 (SD 26.2) NR [ Percentile change ‐0.28, SD 14.2] 48,5 (SD 25.4) NR [ Percentile change ‐0.95, SD 15.63] Comparison: Dietary and activity interventions versus control BMI (Short term) 13 Altarrah 2018 Barkin 2012 Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 Fitzgibbon 2011 Haines 2013 Hammersley 2019 Heerman 2019 Klein 2010 Linville (Study 1) 2020 Linville (Study 2) 2020 Sun 2017 Vaughn 2021 6 months 3 months 14 weeks 14 weeks 14 weeks 6 months 6 months 7 months 6 months 4 months 4 months 6 months 8 months 15.5 (SD 1.6) 16.6 (SD 2.35) 16.5 (SD 1.5) 17.0 (SD 2.8) 16.5 (SD 1.6) 17.3 (SD 2.1) 16.72 (SD 0.92) 18.1 (SD 2.2) 16.0 (SD 1.5) 16.21 (SD 1.45) 17.26 (SD 2.33) 16.86 (SD 1.57) 16.25 (SD 1.65) 15.7 (SD 1.5) NR (regression models) NR [change 0.05, SE 0.05] NR [change 0.11, SE 0.11] NR [change 0.11, SE 0.05] 17.16 (SD 1.99) 16.51 (SD 0.75) 18.0 (SD 2.5) 15.9 (SD 1.6) 16.25 (SD 2.03) 17.34 (SD 2.22) 16.58 (SD 1.43) 16.27 (SD 1.96) 15.4 (SD 1.8) 17.2 (SD 2.21) 16.7 (SD 2.0) 17.5 (SD 2.2) 16.6 (SD 2.2) 17.4 (SD 2.7) 17.28 (SD 1.44) 18.1 (SD 3.0) 16.2 (SD 1.5) 16.57 (SD 1.47) 16.52 (SD 1.02) 16.64 (SD 1.28) 16.22 (SD 1.7) 15.9 (SD 1.8) NR ( regression models) NR [change 0.14, SE 0.05] NR [change 0.13, SE 0.11] NR [change 0.22, SE 0.05] 17.57 (SD 3.22) 16.87 (SD 1.24) 18.4 (SD 3.3) 16.3 (SD 1.6) 16.74 (SD 1.83) 16.31 (SD 1.13) 16.25 (SD 1.34) 16.25 (SD 1.34) BMI (Medium term) 9 Derwig 2021 a Derwig 2021 b Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 French 2018 Haines 2016 Heerman 2019 Iaia 2017 Walton 2015 Ward 2020 1 year 1 year 1 year 1 year 12 months 9 months 1 year 1 year 9 months 9 months 15.81 (SD 0.78) 18.05 (SD 0.44) 16.5 (SD 1.5) 17.0 (SD 2.8) 17.8 (SD 2.2) 17.5 (SD 2.6) 18.1 (SD 2.2) 16.2 (SD 0.1) 16.3 (SD 1.46) 16.99 (SD 2.1) 15.67 (SD 1.01) 17.87 (SD 1.1) NR [change 0.02, SE 0.11] NR [change 0.33, SE 0.14] 17.5 (SD 2.6) 17.3 (SD 3.3) 18.5 (SD 2.7) 16.1 (95% CI 15.9, 16.3) 16.4 (SD 1.88) 16.96 (SD 2.4) 15.78 (SD 0.77) 18.09 (SD 0.48) 16.7 (SD 2.0) 17.5 (SD 2.2) 17.4 (SD 1.3) 17.2 (SD 2.1) 18.1 (SD 3.0) 16.2 (SD 0.1) 16.2 (SD 1.36) 16.67 (SD 1.82) 15.67 (SD 1.02) 18.11 (SD 1.18) NR [change 0.64, SE 0.11] NR [change 0.48, SE 0.14] 17.4 (SD 1.7) 17.4 (SD 1.9) 18.7 (SD 3.7) 16.0 (95% CI 15.8, 16.2) 16.3 (SD 1.61) 16.44 (SD 1.95) a normal weight; b overweight BMI (Long term) 5 Barkin 2018 Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 French 2018 Iaia 2017 36 months 2 years 2 years 36 months 2 years 16.7 (0.8) 16.5 (SD 1.5) 17.0 (SD 2.8) 17.8 (SD 2.2) 16.2 (SD 0.1) 17.8 (SD 2.2) NR [change 0.48, SE 0.14] NR [change 0.46, SE 0.17] 18.4 (SD 3.3) 16.1 (95% CI 15.8, 16.4) 16.6 (0.8) 16.7 (SD 2.0) 17.5 (SD 2.2) 17.4 (SD 1.3) 16.2 (SD 0.1) 17.8 (SD 2.1) NR [change 1.14, SE 0.14] NR [change 0.7, SE 0.18] 18.3 (SD 2.7) 16.3 (95% CI 16.0, 16.6) zBMI (Short term) 14 Alkon 2014 Altarrah 2018 Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 Davis 2016 Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019 Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 Fitzgibbon 2011 Haines 2013 Malden 2019 Ostbye 2012 Sherwood 2015 Skouteris 2016 Vaughn 2021 7 months 6 months 4‐8 months 7 months 5 months 14 weeks 14 weeks 14 weeks 6 months 15‐17 weeks 8 months 6 months 6 months 8 months 0.75 (SD 0.98) 0.1 (SD 1.1) 0.38 (SD 1.16) 0.71 (95% CI 0.6, 0.82) NR (n children by weight category) 0.62 (SD 0.9) 0.87 (SD 1.24) 0.6 (SD 1.0) 0.95 (SD 1.12) 0.41 (SD 1.16) 0.35 (SE 0.08) 1.01 (SD 0.36) 0.66 (SD 0.94) 0.4 (SD 1.01) 0.71 (SD 0.96) 0.2 (SD 1.0) 0.38 (SD 0.82) 0.74 (95% CI 0.63, 0.85) NR [change ‐0.10, 95% CI ‐0.24, 0.04] NR [change 0.06, SE 0.03] NR [change 0.07, SE 0.07] NR [change 0.08, SE 0.03] 0.89 (SD 1.05) 0.43 (SD 1.09) NR [change 0.03, SE 0.05] 0.99 (SD 0.37) 0.6 (SD 1.0) 0.44 (SD 1.06) 0.61 (SD 0.93) 0.0 (SD 1.2) 0.23 (SD 1.01) 0.65 (95% CI 0.54, 0.76) NR (n children by weight category) 0.67 (SD 1.11) 1.13 (SD 1.06) 0.7 (SD 1.1) 0.88 (SD 1.24) 0.35 (SD 1.17) 0.47 (SE 0.08) 0.86 (SD 0.43) 0.65 (SD 0.82) 0.42 (SD 1.0) 0.67 (SD 0.98) 0.3 (SD 1.1) ‐0.06 (SD 1.21) 0.66 (95% CI 0.55, 0.77) NR [change ‐0.16, 95% CI ‐0.34, 0.03] NR [change 0.08, SE 0.03] NR [change 0.05, SE 0.07] NR [change 0.12, SE 0.03] 0.98 (SD 1.07) 0.41 (SD 1.07) NR [change ‐0.02, SE 0.05] 0.85 (SD 0.61) 0.6 (SD 1.0) 0.45 (SD 1.0) zBMI (medium term) 15 Davis 2016 Derwig 2021 a Derwig 2021 b Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 French 2018 Gato‐Moreno 2021 Haines 2016 Iaia 2017 Morgan 2022 Morshed 2018 Skouteris 2016 Slusser 2012 Stookey 2017 Tomayko 2019 Zask 2012 12 months 1 year 1 year 1 year 1 year 12 months 12 months 9 months 1 year 9 months 12 months 1 year 12 months 12 months (Table 4) 1 year 10 months 0.71 (95% CI 0.6, 0.82) 0.11 (SD 0.59) 1.62 (SD 0.25) 0.62 (SD 0.9) 0.87 (SD 1.24) 1.2 (SD 1.0) 0.23 (SD 1.18) 0.88 (SD 1.4) 0.27 (SD 0.07) 0.4 (SD 1.0) 1.1 (SD 0.09) 0.66 (SD 0.94) NR (n by weight category only) NR (n by weight category only) 0.78 (SD 1.06) 0.14 (SE 0.06) 0.76 (95% CI 0.65, 0.88) 0.16 (SD 0.72) 1.54 (SD 0.56) NR [change ‐0.06, SE 0.05] NR [change 0.0, SE 0.09] 1.12 (SD 1.0) 0.1 (SD 0.99) 0.82 (SD 1.11) 0.38 (95% CI 0.23, 0.53) 0.02 (95% CI ‐0.08, 0.11) 1.03 (SD 0.09) 0.6 (SD 0.9) NR [change ‐0.02, SE 0.08] NR [change ‐0.1, SE 0.02] 0.76 (SD 1.04) 0.11 (SE 0.06) 0.65 (95% CI 0.54, 0.76) 0.1 (SD 0.58) 1.64 (SD 0.27) 0.67 (SD 1.11) 1.13 (SD 1.06) 1.1 (SD 0.7) 0.17 (SD 0.82) 0.79 (SD 1.36) 0.28 (SD 0.08) 0.2 (SD 0.8) 1.1 (SD 0.08) 0.65 (SD 0.82) NR (n by weight category only) NR (n by weight category only) 0.8 (SD 1.11) 0.11 (SE 0.08) 0.77 (95% CI 0.6, 0.89) 0.17 (SD 0.72) 1.66 (SD 0.58) NR [change 0.13, SE 0.05] NR [change 0.07, SE 0.09] 1.12 (SD 0.8) 0.14 (SD 0.96) 0.98 (SD 1.03) 0.33 (95% CI 0.18, 0.47) 0.13 (95% CI 0.03, 0.22) 1.06 (SD 0.08) 0.5 (SD 0.8) NR [change 0.04, SE 0.09] NR [change ‐0.02, SE 0.02] 0.8 (SD 1.1) 0.24 (SE 0.09) a normal weight; b overweight zBMI (Long term) 10 Davis 2016 Fitzgibbon 2005 Fitzgibbon 2006 Fitzgibbon 2011 French 2018 Gato‐Moreno 2021 Hodgkinson 2019 Iaia 2017 Morshed 2018 Olsen 2020 19 months 2 years 2 years 16 months 36 months 24 months 24 months 2 years 24 months 1.3 years 0.71 (95% CI 0.6, 0.82) 0.62 (SD 0.9) 0.87 (SD 1.24) 0.6 (SD 1.0) 1.2 (SD 1.0) 0.24 (SD 1.21) 0.83 (SD 1.32) 0.27 (SD 0.07) 1.1 (SD 0.09) 0.06 (SD 0.8) 0.86 (95% CI 0.74, 0.98) NR [change 0.02, SE 0.04] NR [change ‐0.13, SE 0.09] NR [change 0.08, SE 0.04] 1.12 (SD 0.9) 0.14 (SD 1.05) 0.65 (SD 1.13) 0.38 (95% CI 0.24, 0.54) 1.02 (SD 0.09) 0.22 (SD 0.8) 0.65 (95% CI 0.54, 0.76) 0.67 (SD 1.11) 1.13 (SD 1.06) 0.7 (SD 1.1) 1.1 (SD 0.7) 0.16 (SD 0.83) 0.19 (SD 1.11) 0.28 (SD 0.08) 1.1 (SD 0.08) 0.15 (SD 0.7) 0.82 (95% CI 0.7, 0.94) NR [change 0.16, SE 0.04] NR [change 0.0, SE 0.09] NR [change 0.1, SE 0.04] 1.12 (SD 0.8) 0.17 (SD 1.03) 0.75 (SD 0.84) 0.44 (95% CI 0.27, 0.6) 1.03 (SD 0.08) 0.24 (SD 0.8) BMI percentile (Short term) N=2 Byrd‐Bredbenner 2018 Sherwood 2015 5.5 months 6 months 46.5 (SD 26.2) 85.89 (SD 8.48) NR [ change ‐0.21, SD 12.87] 82.54 (SD 10.5) 48.5 (SD 25.4) 78.46 (SD 12.2) NR [ change ‐1.32, SD 13.28] 76.65 (SD 16.8) BMI percentile (medium term) N=6 French 2018 Kobel 2019 Morshed 2018 Slusser 2012 Stookey 2017 Ward 2020 12 months 1 year 12 months 12 months 12 months (Table 4) 9 months 81.0 (SD 15.2) 51.9 (SD 25.9) 81.28 (SE 1.83) NR (n children by weight category only) NR (n children by weight category only) 65.57 (SD 29.41) 79.5 (SD 18.9) 48.7 (SD 26.3) 78.2 (SD 1.84) NR [change ‐3.85, SE 1.89] NR [change ‐2.7, SE 0.6] 66.1 (SD 30.74) 82.5 (SD 13.3) 47.9 (SD 25.9) 81.85 (SE 1.69) NR (n children by weight category only) NR (n children by weight category only) 62.59 (SD 30.76) 82.2 (SD 16.6) 48.4 (SD 26.2) 78.57 (SD 1.7) NR [change 1.33, SE 1.85] NR [change ‐0.1, SE 0.6] 62.24 (SD 30.25) BMI percentile (Long term) N=2 French 2018 Morshed 2018 36 months 24 months 81.0 (SD 15.2) 81.28 (SE 1.83) 81.1 (SD 18.8) 77.33 (SD 1.92) 82.5 (SD 13.3) 81.85 (SE 1.69) 81.9 (SD 18.1) 78.51 (SD 1.75) NR = not reported; SD = standard deviation; SE = standard error We present findings from our prespecified subgroup analyses, and note that heterogeneity was generally not well explained by subgrouping factors. Table 11 summarises the details of 13 included studies that contributed little or no outcome data to the meta‐analyses. Of these, 11 studies reported insufficient or unusable data (e.g. no follow‐up data, no standard errors or confidence intervals), and two studies reported some relevant outcome data which we included in the meta‐analyses. Briefly, of these 13 studies, four studies (31%) reported only the percentage of children with overweight at follow‐up. Four studies (31%) stated (usually in a protocol or trial registry) that they would report particular outcomes, but did not do so in the final study reports. Three studies (23%) reported outcomes narratively only. In two studies (15%), the results reported could not be included in the meta‐analyses; for example, one study reported data in a figure, and we were unable to determine accurate statistics. We present findings from these studies narratively below alongside the meta‐analysis results. Dietary interventions versus control We found five studies (2875 participants) that compared dietary interventions to control; of these, three studies (534 participants) were included in meta‐analyses. See Table 1 . We were unable to conduct sensitivity analysis due to the few studies in this comparison. BMI One study showed that the dietary intervention, compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months: MD 0.00, 95% CI ‐0.28 to 0.28; 1 study, 94 participants; low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 1.1; Figure 2 ). 2 Diet Versus Control Dietary interventions, compared with control, were assessed in one study for BMI at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, but meta‐analysis was not feasible. Thus, we present the findings in a narrative summary below (see also Table 11 ). BMI – narrative data Two studies reported BMI data in a way that could not be included in the meta‐analysis ( Table 11 ). Dietary inventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up (low‐certainty evidence). One study reported that a preschool nutritional intervention resulted in no effect on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (De Bock 2012); another study found a lower prevalence of children with overweight and obesity in the dietary group at long‐term follow‐up (Feng 2004). zBMI We found that dietary interventions likely result in little to no difference in zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.03, 95% CI ‐0.13 to 0.19; I 2 = 0%; 2 studies, 145 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 1.2; Figure 3 ) and at medium‐term follow up (MD ‐0.17, 95% CI ‐0.44 to 0.10; 1 study, 389 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 1.3; Figure 4 ). None of the studies reported zBMI at long‐term follow‐up. 3 Diet versus Control 4 Diet Versus Control BMI percentile One study showed that dietary interventions may have little to no effect on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months; MD 1.10, 95% CI ‐3.86 to 6.06; 1 study, 94 participants; low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 1.4; Figure 5 ). None of the included studies reported BMI percentile at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up. 5 Diet Versus Control Serious adverse events None of the five included studies reported data on serious adverse events. Activity interventions versus control We found 12 studies (3142 participants) that compared activity interventions to control, and we were able to include all 12 studies (3142 participants) in at least one of the meta‐analyses. BMI We found that activity interventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.10, 95% CI ‐0.28 to 0.08; I 2 = 0%; 6 studies, 826 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 2.1; Figure 6 ). Activity interventions likely reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.70, 95% CI ‐1.09 to ‐0.31; 1 study, 567 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 2.2; Figure 7 ). None of the included studies reported BMI at long‐term follow‐up. 6 Physical Activity Versus Control 7 Physical Activity Versus Control Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not materially change the results of the meta‐analyses ( Supplementary material 13 ). BMI – narrative data One study reported baseline data only for BMI, with follow‐up data reported for zBMI score only. This study reported no intervention effects on BMI at short‐ or medium‐term follow‐up (Reilly 2006; Table 11 ). zBMI We found that activity interventions likely result in little to no difference in zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.06, 95% CI ‐0.19 to 0.07; I 2 = 0%; 3 studies, 635 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 2.3; Figure 8 ). They may have little to no effect at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.00, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.11; I 2 = 0%; 4 studies, 1083 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 2.4; Figure 9 ). None of the included studies reported zBMI at long‐term follow‐up. 8 Physical Activity Versus Control 9 Physical Activity Versus Control Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not materially change the results of the meta‐analyses ( Supplementary material 13 ). BMI percentile We found that activity interventions likely result in little to no difference in BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD 1.11, 95% CI ‐0.88 to 3.10; 1 study, 666 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 2.5; Figure 10 ) or medium‐term follow up (MD 0.10, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.20; 1 study, 608 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 2.6; Figure 11 ). None of the included studies reported BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up. 10 Physical Activity Versus Control 11 Physical Activity Versus Control No sensitivity analysis could be conducted. Serious adverse events See Table 7 . Two studies (773 participants) reported data on serious adverse events (Barber 2016; Roth 2015). We found that activity interventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on serious adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain. Barber 2016 did not find any unintended effects as a result of the activity intervention. Roth 2015 found no evidence of a difference between groups in the rates of accidents and infections. Combined dietary and activity interventions versus control We found 43 studies (27,868 participants) that compared combined dietary/activity interventions to control; of these, 38 studies (17,358 participants) were included in at least one of the meta‐analyses. BMI We found that combined dietary/activity interventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.08, 95% CI ‐0.20 to 0.04; I 2 = 73%; 13 studies, 3867 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.1; Figure 12 ). Dietary plus activity interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.18 to 0.08; I 2 = 43%; 9 studies, 7016 participants; low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.2; Figure 13 ), but may result in a slight reduction in BMI at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.20, 95% CI ‐0.39 to ‐0.01; I 2 = 0%; 5 studies, 2074 participants; low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.3; Figure 14 ). 12 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control 13 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control 14 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not materially change the results of the meta‐analyses at medium ‐ term follow‐up (MD ‐0.01, 95% CI ‐0.14 to 0.11), but did change results marginally at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.19, 95% CI ‐0.37 to ‐0.02), demonstrating that there may be little to no effect on BMI. Results also changed marginally at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.08, 95% CI ‐0.34 to 0.19), demonstrating that there may be little to no effect on BMI. Sensitivity analysis removing studies with ‘at‐risk’ populations based on BMI did not materially change the results in the short, medium, or long term (see Supplementary material 13 ). BMI – narrative data One study reported the proportion of children who were overweight at follow‐up only (data on zBMI and BMI percentile were available from Slusser 2012 and these were included in the relevant meta‐analyses; see also Table 11 ). Slusser 2012 reported a reduction in the number of children with overweight in the combined dietary/activity group at medium‐term follow‐up. zBMI Combined dietary/activity interventions may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.07 to 0.01; I 2 = 32%; 14 studies, 5518 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.4; Figure 15 ). Combined interventions may result in a slight reduction in zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is also very uncertain (MD ‐0.07, 95% CI ‐0.11 to ‐0.04; I 2 = 18%; 15 studies, 11,043 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.5; Figure 16 ). Combined interventions may result in a slight reduction of zBMI at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.07, 95% CI ‐0.13 to ‐0.01; I 2 = 43%; 10 studies, 4693 participants; low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.6; Figure 17 ). 15 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control 16 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control 17 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not materially change the results of the meta‐analyses at short‐ and medium‐term follow‐up, but did change results marginally at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.02, 95% CI ‐0.06 to 0.01), demonstrating there may be little to no effect on zBMI at follow‐up. Sensitivity analysis removing studies with ‘at‐risk’ populations based on zBMI did not materially change the results at short‐, medium‐, or long‐term follow‐up ( Supplementary material 13 ). zBMI – narrative data Two studies were not included in the meta‐analyses (Hughes 2021; Penalvo 2015; see also Table 11 ). Hughes 2021 reported the proportion of children with overweight at follow‐up only for zBMI, and no effects were observed at short‐ or medium‐term follow‐up. Penalvo 2015 reported zBMI data in a figure only, where it was not possible to extract accurate recordings. This study reported a lower obesity prevalence in the intervention group at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, though this was not statistically significant. BMI percentile Combined dietary plus activity interventions may have little to no effect on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD 3.61, 95% CI ‐4.28 to 11.49; I 2 = 19%; 2 studies, 112 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.7; Figure 18 ) or long‐term follow up (MD ‐0.61, 95% CI ‐3.54 to 2.32; I 2 = 0%; 2 studies, 672 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.9; Figure 19 ), and may result in a slight reduction of BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.81, 95% CI ‐3.37 to ‐0.24; I 2 = 22%; 6 studies, 2557 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 3.8; Figure 20 ). However, the evidence for all three cases is very uncertain. 18 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control 19 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control 20 Diet and Physical Activity Versus Control Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not materially change the results of the meta‐analyses for short‐ and medium‐term follow‐up ( Supplementary material 13 ). Sensitivity analysis removing studies with ‘at‐risk’ populations based on BMI did not change the results at short‐term follow‐up, though this caused a slight (negligible) change in results at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.86, 95% CI ‐3.58 to 1.86). No sensitivity analysis could be conducted for outcome data at long‐term follow‐up (see Supplementary material 13 ). BMI percentile – narrative data Three studies were not included in the meta‐analyses (Manios 2022; Natale 2017; Natale 2021; see also Table 11 ). One study reported no intervention effects on BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (Manios 2022). One study reported a lower increase in BMI percentile in the intervention group at long‐term follow‐up (Natale 2017), whilst Natale 2021 reported no intervention effects on BMI percentile (Natale 2021). Serious adverse events Details of serious adverse events are illustrated in Table 7 . Four studies reported data on serious adverse events (Barkin 2018; Fernandez‐Jimenez 2019; Fitzgibbon 2005; Fitzgibbon 2006). Combined dietary/activity interventions, when compared with control, may have little to no effect on serious adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain. Barkin 2018 reported that one parent fractured an ankle roller‐skating at a community centre, but no other adverse events were reported as a result of the intervention. No events were reported in the other three studies. Dietary interventions versus activity interventions We did not find any studies that evaluated this comparison. Dietary interventions versus dietary interventions We found two studies involving 892 participants that compared one dietary intervention to another dietary intervention (Lumeng 2017; Swindle 2021); neither was eligible for meta‐analysis. BMI The two studies did not assess BMI. zBMI – narrative data One study assessed zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up but was not eligible for meta‐analysis (Lumeng 2017). This three‐arm study reported a reduction in zBMI in one intervention arm ('Head Start' plus 'Preschool Obesity Prevention Series' plus 'Incredible Years Series'), and a greater reduction in the other intervention arm that did not include the 'Incredible Years Series' programme (i.e. 'Head Start' plus 'Preschool Obesity Prevention Series'). See Table 11 . The two studies did not assess zBMI at short‐ or long‐term follow‐up. BMI percentile – narrative data One study assessed BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up but was not eligible for meta‐analysis (Swindle 2021). This study reported no reduction in BMI percentile across both groups ( Table 11 ). The two studies did not assess BMI percentile at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up. Serious adverse events The two studies did not assess serious adverse events. Activity intervention versus activity intervention We found one study, Adamo 2017 (88 participants), that compared one activity intervention to another activity intervention. BMI Adamo 2017 reported that an activity intervention (childcare only), compared to another activity intervention (childcare and home), likely results in little to no difference in BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.20, 95% CI ‐0.49 to 0.09; 1 study; 88 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 4.1). No data on BMI at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up were available. No sensitivity analysis could be conducted. Other outcomes Adamo 2017 did not measure zBMI, BMI percentile, or serious adverse events. Dietary plus activity interventions versus dietary plus activity interventions We found four studies (1623 participants) that compared two different combinations of dietary and activity interventions (Hammersley 2021, Hawkins 2019, Jouret 2009, Tomayko 2016). BMI Evidence from one study suggests that a combined dietary/activity intervention delivered by the intervener, compared to a combined dietary/activity intervention delivered via mail, may have little to no effect on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.10, 95% CI ‐1.15 to 0.95; 1 study, 114 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 5.1). None of the included studies reported BMI at short‐ or long‐term follow‐up. No sensitivity analysis could be conducted. zBMI Evidence from one study suggests that a combined dietary/activity intervention (intensive), compared with a combined intervention (light touch), likely results in little to no difference in zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.60, 95% CI ‐0.88 to ‐0.32; 1 study, 16 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; Analysis 5.2). A combined dietary/activity intervention (intensive), compared with a combined dietary/activity intervention (light touch), may result in little to no difference in zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD 0.00, 95% CI ‐0.39 to 0.39; 1 study, 114 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 5.3). Only narrative data were available assessing combined dietary/activity interventions versus another combined intervention at long‐term follow‐up for zBMI (see below). No sensitivity analysis could be conducted. zBMI – narrative data One study was not included in the meta‐analyses for this outcome (Jouret 2009; Table 11 ). This study reported a reduction in zBMI at long‐term follow‐up in intervention groups, with greater reductions from the basic strategy delivered in underprivileged areas, and the intensive intervention delivered in non‐underprivileged areas. BMI percentile The evidence suggests that dietary and activity interventions (intensive), compared with dietary and activity interventions (light touch), may have little to no effect on BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD 0.00, 95% CI ‐0.62 to 0.63; I 2 = 0%; 2 studies, 354 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; Analysis 5.4). None of the studies included in this comparison reported on BMI percentile at short‐ or long‐term follow‐up. No sensitivity analysis could be conducted. Serious adverse events No studies reported data on serious adverse events for this comparison. Subgroup analysis We conducted prespecified subgroup analyses by the main setting of the interventions (childcare setting, home, childcare plus home, other), participants' socioeconomic status (low versus mixed), and duration of intervention (short: < 9 months; medium: 9 to 15 months; long: > 15 months). Results for all individual subgroups are presented in Supplementary material 12 . Subgrouping by these factors, in general, did not provide an explanation for the heterogeneity observed among the studies. Only two tests for subgroup differences were statistically significant at a 5% significance level: (1) intervention setting for the comparison between combined diet/activity interventions versus control for BMI at short‐term follow‐up, and (2) intervention duration for the comparison between combined diet/activity interventions versus control for BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up. We did not perform planned subgroup analyses by sex and income status of country (using World Bank criteria [ 107 ]), as insufficient studies presented subgroup analyses by sex and insufficient studies were conducted outside high‐income countries. Sensitivity analysis Different ICCs In our main analysis, we did not use any ICC imputation; we simply conducted the analysis based on the reported statistics in the original studies and included footnotes stating when studies had adjusted for clustering. We report information on whether studies had adjusted for clustering, and the reported ICC in Supplementary material 10 . Our sensitivity analyses investigated the impact of imputing a conservative ICC of 0.04. We found no material differences in the results ( Supplementary material 13 ). Equity assessment Where the impact of potential intervention‐generated inequalities of individual interventions was reported, we extracted this information and reported it by PROGRESS factor ( Table 9 ; Table 10 ). Of the 10 studies that reported the impact of at least one PROGRESS characteristic on the effectiveness of the intervention, no significant impact was found on race/ethnicity/culture/language (including migration status) (four studies), gender/sex (in four of five studies), education level of parent(s) (two studies), place (one study), or socioeconomic status (one study). Klein 2010 reported that a low threshold health promotion intervention was effective at reducing BMI in boys but not girls; a test of difference in change between boys and girls was not reported. Subgroup analysis based on whether the intervention was targeted at low‐income families (e.g. those living in low‐income areas or those attending centres that provided dedicated support for low‐income families) versus non‐targeted interventions (see Table 6 ) did not provide an explanation for the heterogeneity observed among the studies ( Supplementary material 12 ). We were unable to assess any differences in the impact of interventions according to whether a child had a physical or mental disability because none of the included studies reported this information. Of note, and as reported above, many studies excluded children with disabilities from taking part in their research ( Table 6 ). Reporting biases We did not develop funnel plots due to the limited number of studies for each comparison. Discussion Summary of main results This review includes 67 studies (36,601 participants) exploring interventions for the prevention of obesity in children aged two to four years. Most of the studies compared an intervention that aimed to improve both diet and activity with a control group. Based on the 'main setting' of the intervention, most studies were conducted in childcare settings (n = 26, 39%) and at home (n = 23, 34%), with multiple studies including equal combinations of home and childcare settings (n = 10, 15%). Very few studies were conducted in community settings (n = 3, 5%) or primary care settings (n = 5, 7%). Most interventions were implemented for less than nine months, with the shortest intervention conducted over one visit (Birken 2012), and the longest over three years (Feng 2004; Penalvo 2015). Over half of the interventions were based on one or more theories of behaviour change, the most common being social cognitive theory. We included meta‐analyses of results from 56 studies (21,404 participants) in this review. The evidence suggests there may be little to no effect of dietary interventions compared with control on BMI at short‐term follow‐up. No statistical data were available to conduct a meta‐analysis of dietary interventions versus control at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up for BMI. Of available narrative studies (n = 1 for each outcome), dietary interventions compared to controls may have little to no effect on BMI at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up. Similarly, dietary interventions compared with control likely result in little to no effect on zBMI at short‐ or medium‐term follow‐up. No studies assessed this outcome at long‐term follow‐up. Dietary interventions compared with control may also have little to no effect on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up. No studies assessed this outcome at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up. These outcomes can be found in Table 1 (for BMI and zBMI data). These data, along with BMI percentile data, can be found in Synthesis of results . Activity interventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI, zBMI, or BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up, or zBMI or BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. Activity interventions likely reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up ( Table 2 ; for BMI and zBMI data). These data, along with BMI percentile data, can be found in Synthesis of results . None of the included studies assessed BMI, zBMI, or BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up. The largest amount of evidence (i.e. number of studies) was available for interventions that combined dietary and activity intervention components compared with control. We found that these interventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI, zBMI, or BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain. Combined dietary and activity interventions compared with control may result in little to no difference in BMI at medium‐term follow‐up and may result in a slight reduction of zBMI and BMI percentile at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain ( Table 3 ; for BMI and zBMI data). These data, along with BMI percentile data, can be found in Synthesis of results . Activity interventions alone, and combined dietary/activity interventions, compared with control, may have little to no effect on severe adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain. One study reported that a parent fractured an ankle while roller‐skating during an intervention event at a community centre. One study found no evidence of a difference between groups in rates of accidents or infections. The remaining studies reported no adverse events as a result of the intervention. No studies examining dietary interventions alone reported information relating to serious adverse events. Twenty‐six studies specifically targeted individuals or communities of low socioeconomic status (also known as disadvantaged or under‐served individuals or communities). We included these 26 studies in our analysis exploring differences in the impact of an intervention between individuals of low versus mixed socioeconomic status. However, the findings did not contribute to our learning because, usually, all participants were considered to have low socioeconomic status, and therefore it was not possible to determine differential effectiveness across social strata. In addition, subgroup analyses revealed no evidence of a difference when exploring studies including participants with low socioeconomic status versus assumed mixed socioeconomic status. Importantly, recent fiscal interventions such as the UK soft drinks industry levy, which takes a universal approach, have reduced childhood obesity, with the greatest impact seen in the most deprived UK regions [ 265 ]. This highlights the need to determine the effectiveness of obesity prevention interventions in children from varying socioeconomic backgrounds. We included all interventions that met the inclusion criteria, regardless of the setting (e.g. home, childcare, healthcare, or community setting; the Included studies section describes the distribution of studies by setting). Our primary analyses separated studies by type of comparison (e.g. active intervention (dietary, activity, combined) versus control or another type of active intervention), but not by type of setting, because this would have left only one or a few studies in each meta‐analysis. However, subgroup analyses by study setting demonstrated that for combined dietary/activity interventions versus control, childcare only (zBMI and BMI percentile, medium‐term follow‐up), home only (BMI short‐term follow‐up and BMI percentile medium‐term follow‐up), and childcare plus home (BMI and zBMI long‐term follow‐up) interventions all showed some effectiveness on at least one BMI outcome. Limitations of the evidence included in the review Every included study collected and reported data at baseline on at least one PROGRESS characteristic (Place of residence, Race, Occupation, Gender, Religion, Education, Socioeconomic status, Social capital). However, only 10 studies reported on the impact of at least one PROGRESS characteristic on the effectiveness of the intervention: gender/sex (five studies), race/ethnicity/culture/language (four studies), parents' education (two studies), place of residence (one study), and socioeconomic status (one study). Although we understand researchers' reluctance to perform multiple, post hoc analyses of this type, the dearth of evidence in this review on the impact of interventions on health inequalities is a significant limitation. Certainty of the evidence We assessed the risk of bias in the 110 results from the 56 studies included in the meta‐analyses using the RoB 2 tool. Overall, we judged most of the results to be at high risk of bias (n = 53; 48%), mostly due to missing outcome data (n = 39; 33%). We had 'some concerns' for bias for 41 results (37%), and judged 16 results (15%) as having a low risk of bias. We tested the effect of removing studies rated as high risk, which had little to no effect on the results ( Supplementary material 13 ). We assessed the certainty of evidence for our critical outcomes (BMI, zBMI, and BMI percentile at short‐, medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, where available, and serious adverse events (see Critical outcomes )) using the GRADE approach. We developed summary of findings tables for three comparisons – 'Dietary interventions versus control', 'Activity interventions versus control', and 'Combined dietary and activity interventions versus control' – and presented results for BMI, zBMI, and serious adverse events. The certainty of evidence across these comparisons and outcomes ranged from moderate to very low, based on limitations in the study design (high risk of bias as assessed by the RoB 2 tool), imprecision, inconsistency of results (heterogeneity); indirectness of evidence, and publication bias. We report the reasons for downgrading by these five GRADE criteria in the footnotes of the tables (see Table 1 ; Table 2 ; Table 3 ). In total, we completed a GRADE assessment of 17 outcomes. Risk of bias Of the 21 critical outcome measures presented across the three tables, we completed GRADE assessments on 17 (four outcomes were not measured or reported). Of these, we downgraded nine critical outcomes by one or two levels due to high risk of bias (i.e. high‐risk studies contributed > 30% of the weight in the meta‐analysis) for missing outcome data. We did not downgrade other outcomes for risk of bias, as the study data at high risk of bias contributed 30% or less of the weight in the meta‐analysis, or there were no study data at high risk of bias in the meta‐analysis. We did not downgrade outcomes with a high number of results judged as having 'some concerns', as these judgements were mostly due to a lack of information. Imprecision Of the 21 critical outcome measures (BMI, zBMI, serious adverse events) reported in the three summary of findings tables ( Table 1 ; Table 2 ; Table 3 ), we downgraded 10 critical outcome measures by one level for imprecision (the number of participants included in each meta‐analysis was < 3000, there was no clear evidence of an effect, or both). Inconsistency Of the 21 critical outcome measures (BMI, zBMI, serious adverse events) reported in the three summary of findings tables ( Table 1 ; Table 2 ; Table 3 ), we downgraded four critical outcome measures by one level for inconsistency as the estimated heterogeneity variance (I 2 ) was higher than 40%, the direction of the results was inconsistent, or both. Indirectness Of the 21 critical outcome measures (BMI, zBMI, serious adverse events) reported in the three summary of findings tables ( Table 1 ; Table 2 ; Table 3 ), we downgraded only one critical outcome measure – long‐term BMI in the combined dietary/activity intervention versus control comparison – by one level for indirectness (i.e. a substantial contribution of the results were from studies in unusual populations). Specifically, we had concerns as this outcome included results from studies in children at risk of developing obesity, either due to a current high BMI status or because they had one or more parent(s) living with obesity. Some other outcomes also included data from highly specific populations (also regarded as at high risk for obesity, e.g. from specific communities with a high prevalence of obesity), but we did not downgrade these outcomes, as the contribution of these studies to the results was moderate (< 30% weight). The remaining outcomes only included data from the general population. Publication bias Of the 21 critical outcome measures (BMI, zBMI, serious adverse events) reported in the three summary of findings tables ( Table 1 ; Table 2 ; Table 3 ), we downgraded 11 critical outcome measures by one level for non‐reporting bias, as we had evidence of measured outcomes being missing from the ROB‐ME assessment (e.g. studies included in the comparison were ineligible for meta‐analysis). Therefore, we had serious concerns about the potential for missing data to impact on the result. For the remaining 10 outcomes, there was no known evidence of missing data. We had some concerns about the possibility of missing studies likely to have eligible results for all the results included in the meta‐analyses. However, we did not downgrade those results as this is a possibility in all systematic reviews due to potential missing evidence not identified through the searches. Overall, our confidence in the evidence was reduced mainly due to the high proportion of studies judged to be at high risk of bias (largely due to missing participant data and the randomisation process), imprecision of the results (studies were very small or there were insufficient studies with data contributing to the evidence for some of the outcomes), and missing evidence. Overall completeness and applicability of evidence Nearly all studies were undertaken in general populations of high‐income countries and this may affect the applicability of our results to non‐high‐income countries (we identified only four studies from upper‐middle‐income countries). The reasons why fewer trials of public health interventions that focus on non‐communicable diseases (including those aiming to prevent obesity in children) are conducted in low‐ and middle‐income countries include the cost of these trials and the difference in research capacity, infrastructure, culture, and priorities [ 266 ]. All studies enrolled both boys and girls. It is worth noting that many (n = 26, 39%) of the interventions included in this review were tested in young children from more deprived/lower socioeconomic status backgrounds, who are considered at higher risk of developing obesity. This included 10 studies targeting low‐income families, 12 with Head Start/Sure Start Centres as the study sites, two studies taking place in some of the most socioeconomically‐deprived areas in Western Europe, and two targeting American Indians living in rural communities. Of the studies, 10% (n = 7) aimed at improving dietary behaviours, 18% (n = 12) aimed at improving activity behaviours (physical activity, sedentary behaviour, and sleep), and 72% (n = 48) both dietary and activity behaviours. Most studies compared the intervention with usual care, although some studies used an alternative intervention not associated with energy‐balanced behaviours (e.g. injury prevention), and a few studies tested one type of intervention to prevent obesity versus another. Notably, very few studies examined the range of 24‐hour activity behaviours (physical activity, sedentary time, sleep). In recent years, there has been a paradigm shift towards an integrated approach to human movement behaviours, as opposed to viewing these behaviours in isolation [ 267 , 268 ]. This shift has led to the introduction of 24‐hour movement behaviour guidelines, including those by the World Health Organization in 2019, focusing on the physical activity, sedentary screen time, and sleep of young children [ 269 ]. Future interventions may adopt this more holistic view of children's movement behaviour as part of obesity prevention efforts. We identified evidence gaps for certain populations, interventions, and outcomes. First, 18 studies excluded children with physical disabilities and 16 studies excluded children with mental disabilities. Second, we did not identify any studies meeting our inclusion criteria that used a 'whole systems' approach [ 23 ], or focused on improving the wider environment (i.e. beyond the home, childcare, healthcare, and community settings). Such interventions are more able to fully integrate other socio‐ecological factors that are determinants of individual‐level diet and activity behaviours and, in theory, have a more meaningful population‐level effect and public health benefit [ 24 , 270 ]. Few interventions focused on digital technology: one intervention was an ‘exergaming’ intervention and five studies delivered content online or via smartphones. Third, although most studies reported zBMI, BMI, or both, some studies (including those published in the last five years) only reported BMI percentile or other body weight‐related outcomes (e.g. proportion of children living with overweight and obesity). Most studies did not report on serious adverse events. Interventions for this age group were fairly evenly split between home and childcare settings. All interventions involved some level of information provision to childcare providers or parents. Most interventions sought to change the children’s social environment, enabled and guided by their parents, childcare providers, or other responsible adults. Most interventions that aimed to change and improve activity behaviours sought to enable and/or guide choice by changing the children's physical environment (at childcare or at home). Much of the evidence identified included interventions with home‐based elements. Evidence suggests that the home is a key space for the facilitation of physical activity and related behaviours [ 271 ]. This includes, but is not limited to, the important role that parents play in their children’s movement, in terms of being role models to facilitate physical activity, the use of active transportation, access to screens, and adequate space/resources for play and movement [ 271 ]. Though this highlights the importance of having home elements in interventions for young children, it is important to note that factors related to the home are not always changeable through individual‐level intervention [ 21 ], and caution is required to ensure that interventions do not create intervention‐generated inequalities [ 18 , 19 ]. The wider determinants contributing to obesity, and consequently the interventions, must be addressed for substantive and meaningful change [ 7 ]. In line with this, existing research suggests that interventions to prevent obesity or improve obesity‐related behaviours in young children from socioeconomically‐disadvantaged backgrounds were more successful if they included links to community resources [ 272 ] – something that was rarely present in interventions included in this review. Further, a large proportion of included studies implemented childcare‐based interventions. These interventions can be applicable to policy‐makers, childcare settings, and health professionals who work in early years settings. These organisations and advocates can be reasonably confident of the completeness of the evidence reviewed for childcare‐based interventions for young children. Importantly, increasing activity levels and eating a healthier diet have health and well‐being benefits (outcomes) beyond the prevention of obesity [ 273 , 274 , 275 ], and there is evidence that behaviours established during the early years may track through childhood and adolescence [ 276 , 277 , 278 , 279 ]. Indeed, the health conditions that make the greatest contribution to adult healthcare burden in most high‐ and middle‐income countries are largely driven by unhealthy and risky behaviours, including low levels of physical activity, high levels of sedentary behaviour, and unhealthy diets. Tackling these behaviours during early childhood should therefore be a priority. Measures might include tackling the marketing of unhealthy foods; ensuring access to affordable fruit and vegetables; providing physical activity opportunities during childcare; and developing safe and supportive local community sessions. We identified evidence gaps in the impact of interventions on serious adverse events (harms), including eating disorders. Weight stigma can begin during childhood; these experiences can have negative implications for the psychological and physical health of young people [ 280 ]. A focus on reducing weight stigma, and framing a healthy diet and enjoyable movement from the earliest years as positive for overall health, may help children to build a healthy relationship with these behaviours [ 21 ]. Limitations of the review processes Our review updates part of a previous Cochrane review using the same eligibility criteria and largely the same methodology [ 82 ]. Following the original review, we only included studies with the stated aim of changing children's diet or activity (physical activity, sedentary behaviour, sleep), or both, to help prevent obesity. We therefore excluded studies of similar interventions that did not report such an aim, which may have biased our selection of studies if the reporting of primary studies’ aims was influenced by their findings. If in any doubt, we checked the aim with that provided in the published protocol or trial register, where possible. We restricted eligibility to studies providing evidence of having assessed BMI at baseline and follow‐up so that we could examine changes from baseline. Again, this restriction may have led to excluding studies with similar interventions to those we included; however, we contacted authors for clarification where necessary. Following the previous review, and as specified in our protocol, we grouped studies into somewhat crude comparisons according to the broad target of behaviour change (diet, activity, or both) of the intervention. This approach is particularly problematic for activity interventions, where some studies solely targeted sedentary behaviour or screen time, as opposed to physical activity (see Table 5 for details). Further investigation examining differences between physical activity and sedentary behaviour interventions may be worthwhile. These discrepancies in target behaviours may have led to a diversity of specific intervention approaches within comparisons, and probably account for some of the subsequent statistical heterogeneity. We were unable to determine the specific causes of this heterogeneity with our planned analyses. Further investigation of how the variation in intervention approaches and intervention fidelity impact on outcomes may be valuable, including how these relate to the wider determinants of health. We observed high statistical heterogeneity in most of our meta‐analyses; that is, effects varied substantially across studies within the comparisons. Prespecified subgroup analyses by main setting of the interventions (childcare, home, childcare and home, other), participants' socioeconomic status (low versus mixed), and length of intervention did not provide an explanation for the heterogeneity observed among the studies. In addition, an unplanned additional sensitivity analysis removing studies that focused on children at risk of obesity (e.g. high BMI at baseline, parent(s) with overweight or obesity) also did not provide an explanation for the heterogeneity in observed outcomes. This heterogeneity might emanate from the heterogeneity of the interventions grouped in each comparison, varying as they did in terms of delivery, intensity, duration, and other features [ 92 ]. Their only common feature was the intended mechanism by which they worked. It is also possible that the heterogeneity is due, at least in part, to variability in the fidelity of the interventions, although we did not collect data on this. In addition, heterogeneity could also be due to differences in participants' baseline characteristics within and across trials (e.g. PROGRESS characteristics). Further analysis of the impact of these participant‐level characteristics would be useful to help determine for whom preventive interventions work better. Such analyses would require collecting individual participant data or aggregating results subgrouped by baseline participant characteristics; future work should address this. We restricted our attention to the outcome measures zBMI, BMI, and BMI percentile (the last one a post hoc addition as we developed the review). Outcome reporting bias may be operating if studies with systematically different results reported different outcome measures [ 281 , 282 ], although we regard this as unlikely. Evidence of possible suppression of uninteresting findings is addressed as part of our ROB‐ME and GRADE assessment. Finally, because we looked at general populations of children rather than clinical populations, and the main aim of many of our interventions of interest was not exclusively the prevention of obesity (for example, many studies focussed on improving diet or activity levels to improve health in general, although one of the stated aims was preventing obesity), many RCTs reported a wide variety of other outcomes (e.g. fruit and vegetable consumption) which we did not examine in this review. Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews This review provides practitioners with a robust evidence base because it is restricted to randomised controlled trials (RCTs), and includes three times as many studies (67 versus 23) in young children compared to the previous version [ 82 ]. The body of evidence in this review suggests that a range of dietary and activity interventions may have little to no effect on obesity in children aged two to four years (i.e. gaining excess weight compared with what young children may otherwise experience as part of healthy growth). The results reported here are comparable with the previous Cochrane review [ 82 ]: it found no effects of dietary or activity interventions alone in children aged zero to five years, whilst combined dietary plus activity interventions led to a small reduction in BMI and zBMI. The increased number of studies in this current review provides a more balanced and comprehensive summary of the impact of these interventions. Other reviews that have examined the evidence base on interventions to prevent (and manage) childhood obesity from the early years have tended to use a narrative approach rather than meta‐analyses [ 91 , 92 , 93 , 283 , 284 ]. Narrative synthesis may make providing firm conclusions challenging. That said, the findings of other reviews mirror ours: namely, interventions targeting diet or activity only had modest or no effects, whereas interventions targeting both diet and activity had the greatest effectiveness. Of course, one can always find the rare study that shows that an intervention is effective, but the entire evidence base suggests that these interventions alone showed little to no effect. Of note, these findings are similar to those for older children when we conducted further analysis on the interventions included in our two sister Cochrane reviews [ 80 , 81 , 285 ]. For older children, the inclusion of active participation in physical activity, particularly when integrated within the school day, involving an electronic component and being perceived by children as ‘fun’, had a small positive effect [ 285 ]. Our review included more studies and meta‐analysed more children than other reviews [ 91 , 92 , 93 , 283 , 284 ], including the 2019 Brown review [ 82 ]. The steep rise in the number of studies published since 2019 reflects an increased focus on healthy weight management during early childhood by research funding bodies and researchers. Although confidence in the certainty of results remains low or very low, mainly due to the studies' methodological limitations, the increased volume of evidence available for this review may assure readers and stakeholders that, at least for childcare and home‐based interventions, the results of little to no effect of the interventions are unlikely to change with the addition of further studies. Given that combined dietary/activity interventions appear to be the most effective in comparison to targeting behaviours in isolation, this suggests that healthy environments should facilitate access to a healthy, nutritious diet and movement opportunities from the earliest years. Authors' conclusions Implications for practice The interventions were diverse in nature (theory, duration, setting, complexity, target of mechanism). We acknowledge the limitations of simply grouping such diverse interventions into three broad categories by diet, activity, or both. For example, dietary interventions underpinned by a particular theory, or that took place in a particular setting, may have been more effective. Though we conducted a priori subgroup analyses on some of these nuances, as set out in our protocol, we considered post hoc subgroup analysis on the myriad of possible combinations (usually of just one or a few studies) to be statistically unwise. The long‐term significance of the modest benefits of combined dietary/activity interventions on body mass index (BMI) and BMI z‐score (zBMI), as reported in this review, should be considered alongside the natural slope of BMI change during this age period (two to four years). During these early years, the natural slope of BMI change is negative and the percentage of fat mass decreases before the adiposity rebound [ 286 ]. As such, long‐term follow‐up of young children in studies, such as those included in this review, to a point after their adiposity rebound, is required to quantify the impact of the interventions in the longer term. However, the long‐term clinical significance, at a population level, of a very small benefit of an intervention that prevents the gain of BMI and excess weight, compared with what a young child would otherwise experience over the short or medium term, is difficult to assess and may be minor. Given this, and to aid interpretability for the reader, a recent modelling study by Russell and colleagues found that preventive interventions for childhood obesity resulted in an estimated mean difference (effect size) in zBMI of ‐0.07 (95% confidence interval 0.00 to ‐0.14) [ 287 ]. Russell and colleagues concluded that, despite small effects at the individual level, if these interventions were delivered at scale, they could make a valuable contribution to reducing the overall prevalence of childhood obesity. We know that the diet and activity behaviours that are adopted in childhood track throughout life [ 276 ]. The potential cumulative effect of small but sustainable changes towards a healthier diet and a more physically active lifestyle could, at least in theory, reap long‐term benefits for the promotion of healthy weight for individuals, communities, and populations [ 275 ]. At the same time, it is important to recognise that a healthy diet and being physically active has many health and well‐being benefits for children beyond the promotion of a healthy body weight, including motor development, fitness, and bone and skeletal health [ 274 ]. The World Health Organization (WHO) Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity suggests that the failure of interventions, including most of those included in this review, is due in part to the fact that they target individual behaviour change [ 1 ]. The WHO Commission suggests that upstream interventions may be particularly important, and more effort is required in this area. Examples of interventions for young children include tackling the marketing of unhealthy foods (such as sugar‐sweetened beverages), offering free healthy school meals [ 288 ], and providing physical activity opportunities during childcare. It is now acknowledged that tackling obesity requires a systems approach, and policy initiatives across government departments should be joined up [ 24 , 270 ]. Another important finding is that none of the six studies that reported relevant data found any serious adverse events related to the intervention. One study reported that one parent fractured an ankle while roller‐skating during an event at a community centre, but this was not necessarily a direct result of the intervention (Barkin 2018). Only a few studies assessed the costs and cost‐effectiveness of interventions included in this review. On this basis, it is not possible to say whether these interventions are cost‐effective. Similarly, there was extremely limited evidence from upper‐middle‐income countries, and no evidence from lower‐middle‐income countries. This limits the generalisability of our findings, as the extent to which interventions are appropriate in these different contexts is unknown from the currently available evidence. It is worth highlighting that, although we only included studies aiming to prevent obesity (rather than treat children already living with obesity), most studies included entire groups of children who attended, for example, the selected childcare settings. This is a similar approach to that taken for most public health interventions. However, a selection of studies focused on children at higher risk of obesity than others, such as having a parent with overweight or obesity, or excluding children with a BMI under a certain percentile (usually the 50thto 60th percentile). We conducted a sensitivity analysis to determine whether removing these studies affected the overall study results. For two outcomes, removing studies with children potentially considered ‘at risk’ would result in no meta‐analysis being conducted. For the remaining outcomes, removing such studies did not result in any changes to the results. Implications for policy The interventions included in this update mainly focused on changing individual (personal) behaviours and were mainly conducted in childcare settings or at home. Interventions delivered in the community or within a healthcare setting were less prevalent. Childcare settings may be relatively easy to target, and – given that most young children attend these settings – provide a useful point of contact. However, they will not reach all young children. We recognise that the methods employed, including grouping the interventions under one of three categories (diet, activity, or combined diet/activity), may produce results of limited value to policy‐makers deciding which specific interventions within each category would 'work best' in their context. This may be particularly true when considering the 24‐hour movement behaviour paradigm for young children and the importance of these individual behaviours [ 269 ]. Hierarchies of specific interventions according to observed effectiveness could be misleading. The effectiveness of the same intervention is likely to vary by context (e.g. type of childcare provision), and the feasibility of implementation is likely to be dependent on resources. Furthermore, policy‐makers who are responsible for implementing specific obesity prevention policies from early childhood need to ensure that such policies 'fit' within the wider public health strategy and initiatives of the community and population they serve. However, this review does provide policy‐makers with examples of interventions on diet, activity, or both, by country and setting, which may be helpful for planning. We did not identify interventions for this review that aimed to take a (whole) systems approach to preventing obesity during early childhood. Local health authorities and national guidance usually champion the importance of taking such an approach in tackling obesity (incorporating both prevention and treatment initiatives). Research studies (mainly evaluations) designed to assess the impact of implementing such an approach are not traditionally randomised controlled trials (RCTs), and therefore did not meet our inclusion criteria. However, we would argue that the implementation of a 'whole systems' approach to preventing obesity during early childhood consists of interconnected initiatives (some upstream, some downstream) across various settings and levels of the socio‐ecological model [ 5 ]. As such, we suggest that the results of this review are relevant to those with responsibility for contributing to the implementation of a 'whole systems' approach to preventing obesity within preschool/early years settings. A potential opportunity to enhance the impact of interventions that aim to prevent obesity in early childhood is through greater application to implementation science. There are some suggestions that the effects of health innovations can be enhanced by up to 12 times with potent implementation approaches [ 289 ]. A recent Cochrane review found that the use of implementation strategies may result in large increases in the implementation of interventions, and slight improvements in measures of diet and physical activity [ 290 ]. As implementation science advances, its application could amplify the effects of behavioural interventions to prevent obesity during early childhood. Equity‐related implications for practice From our exploratory analyses, we found no indication that interventions to prevent obesity in young children are less effective in those with low socioeconomic status. Of note, these findings are similar to those for older children, whereby analyses revealed no substantial differences in the effectiveness of obesity interventions for different subgroups in most scenarios [ 291 ]. The preferred way of addressing health disparities is to exclusively target the disadvantaged population [ 16 ], and we identified 26 such studies. A proportion of the studies excluded children from taking part in the trial if they had a physical (27%, 18 studies) or mental (24%, 16 studies) disability. This review acknowledged a potential source of inequity, citing evidence of low physical activity levels among young children with disabilities, and emphasising the need for future interventions to ensure these children gain the long‐term benefits of early physical activity [ 292 ]. Implications for research We do not anticipate the effect sizes we found in this review to change significantly with the addition of more studies in childcare/home‐based interventions targeting dietary or activity interventions alone during early childhood. However, further research that includes a wider range of environmental adaptations and community settings and that proactively includes children with disabilities should be conducted. This review revealed a gap in knowledge regarding the reporting of serious adverse events in physical activity and diet interventions, which should be incorporated into future trials. We support the registration of trials in trial registries and encourage researchers to include their trial registration number (TRN) in all publications emanating from their trial. We also encourage researchers to post all publications (including secondary analyses and cross‐sectional analyses) within the relevant section of their registry entry, and to keep this updated. We encourage journals to follow the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) Recommendations and only consider publishing papers from trials that were registered in a public trial registry at or before participant enrolment (see https://www.icmje.org/recommendations/ ). For existing and ongoing studies that meet the inclusion criteria of this review, we suggest researchers follow participants over several years, as in the ongoing study of the HENRY III intervention [ 293 ]. Such follow‐up data could provide important information on the sustainability of behavioural change and the impact on weight. We understand the barriers to conducting this type of work, including funding challenges, ethical approval, and data protection issues. We also understand the perceived higher prestige attached to primary research over secondary data or follow‐up research, and encourage funding bodies and journal editors to place a higher value on the latter research activities. We also suggest that a better understanding of intervention process and implementation, using evaluation methods and implementation metrics by which one can better compare the results of one study with the next (and summarise the information for reviews such as this), would be extremely useful (i.e. by using implementation frameworks in design and evaluation [ 294 ]). This type of activity is critical for the successful translation of interventions from one context to another, and across different countries. We recommend rethinking research priorities and methods for preventing early childhood obesity. Future research should prioritise multilevel and community‐based interventions that address systemic and structural drivers of obesity, using 'whole systems' approaches rather than relying solely on traditional RCTs (see, for example, work by Seidell and Halberstadt [ 295 ]). Research efforts should move beyond diet and activity interventions alone to consider broader environmental, political, and social determinants of health, including those influencing food and physical activity inequalities and insecurity. These complex system approaches may require new and different evaluations (see, for example, work by Luna Pinzon and colleagues [ 296 ]). Researchers can support policy‐makers and organisations by synthesising and communicating the full body of evidence in a balanced and accessible way. We urge researchers and funding bodies in all countries to continue to support research on early childhood obesity in low‐ and middle‐income countries, to better understand the experiences of nutrition transition and rapid weight gain. In the context of some countries, this research should aim to address the double burden of malnutrition. It is worth noting that there are many more published studies that have evaluated the impact of interventions and programmes to prevent obesity in children that are not RCTs as compared with those that are. Where funding and capacity allow, we encourage researchers to opt for an RCT design for their evaluations (including a stepped wedge design, which may be more feasible for rolling out national community‐level interventions, including 'whole systems' approach interventions), since these designs provide stronger evidence for policy, practice, and the public. Finally, we support the research recommendations set out by the WHO Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity [ 2 ]. Equity‐related implications for research We urge researchers to collect and report baseline information on gender and other PROGRESS (Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Religion, Education, Socioeconomic status, Social capital) factors, and to analyse the effect of the intervention with respect to these factors. We recognise researchers' reluctance to conduct multiple post hoc analyses of this nature. However, such analyses are essential to ensure that interventions considered effective do not inadvertently exacerbate inequalities, thereby strengthening the evidence base for practice and policy. Supporting Information Supplementary materials are available with the online version of this article: 10.1002/14651858.CD015326. Supplementary materials are published alongside the article and contain additional data and information that support or enhance the article. Supplementary materials may not be subject to the same editorial scrutiny as the content of the article and Cochrane has not copyedited, typeset or proofread these materials. The material in these sections has been supplied by the author(s) for publication under a Licence for Publication and the author(s) are solely responsible for the material. Cochrane accordingly gives no representations or warranties of any kind in relation to, and accepts no liability for any reliance on or use of, such material.