Introduction In 1990, the United States Congress passed the [ 1 , 2 ] authorizing the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to create and manage the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP) to increase cancer screening for low-income, uninsured patients (Congressional act page). This program remains of critical importance given that up to 20% of Americans eligible for cervical cancer screening remain uninsured [ 3 ] and ten states have not implemented Medicaid expansion since passage of the Affordable Care Act [ 4 ]. The value of this program is high given that over 90% of cervical cancers are preventable with appropriate primary (HPV vaccination) and secondary (screening and treatment of precancerous lesions) prevention (WHO fact sheet). The World Health Organization (WHO) [ 5 ] predicts the possibility to eradicate cervical cancer by increasing screening rates to 70% by 2030 [ 6 ]. Despite these efforts leading to an initial decline in cervical cancer, incidence and mortality rates have plateaued since the mid-2010s [ 7 ]. Though NBCCEDP programs received over 150 million dollars in 2012 to support clinical services and program management, only 6.5% of eligible patients received cervical cancer screening through the program nationally in the same year [ 8 ]. This low reach is explained in part by the CDC’s historical prioritization of one-time cervical cancer screening among never screened patients between ages 40 and 64 to direct finite program resources to this high-risk subgroup with both cervical and breast cancer screening needs. Some drivers of this program resource rationing have lessened over time. Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, the number of people eligible for cervical cancer screening through NBCCEDP has decreased from 10.3 to 5.3 million people [ 9 ]. In 2012, the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) updated guidelines to increase the screening interval from three years with Papanicolaou (Pap) test cytology alone to 5 years for women aged 30–65 with Pap test and human papillomavirus (HPV) co-testing [ 10 ]. Taken together, the decreasing size of the eligible population and the greater intervals between screenings support increased program capacity to serve a larger proportion of the eligible population and offer serial cervical cancer screenings. ASCCP also subsequently revised management guidelines in 2019 and changed management of low-grade dysplasia (mild abnormalities on a pap test) from immediate colposcopy (diagnostic cervical biopsies) to short-interval follow-up with repeat surveillance co-testing in 1–3 years [ 11 ]. This benefits patients in decreasing discomfort, risks, inconvenience, and cost of potentially unnecessary colposcopy procedures [ 11 ]. However, this also raises the stakes of loss-to-follow-up and failure to maintain up-to-date screening and surveillance. Patients with low-grade cervical dysplasia can go on to develop high-grade dysplasia and/or cervical cancer requiring treatment without appropriate surveillance [ 11 ] with roughly half of all cervical cancers diagnosed in under screened and/or surveilled patients [ 12 ]. Only two prior studies have investigated use of NBCCEDP for multiple screening cycles and both predate the 2019 revision of ASCCP guidelines [ 13 , 14 ]. This necessitates further evaluation of program implementation outcomes in the modern practice environment. Early detection works (EDW), the Kansas NBCCEDP grantee, began offering cervical cancer screening in 1995 (KDHE website source report). This program holds particular importance in Kansas given it is among the ten states without Medicaid expansion [ 4 ]. EDW services have expanded over time to include screening for patients aged 21–39 and multiple screening cycles (KDHE website source report). Nevertheless, Kansas ranks thirtieth of fifty states in cervical cancer screening, ranks forty-fifth in HPV vaccination rates, and has made only limited gains in increasing screening rates for patients with high school-level education and/or lowest quartile income level (ACS Cancer Statistics; NBCCEDP Kansas 5y summary). Given the discrepancy between Kansas’s poor screening outcomes and continued availability of EDW services, program evaluation is especially important in this high-need local context. The objective of this study was to evaluate the reach of EDW in Kansas and assess disparities in program utilization by demographic factors. Secondary objectives were to assess the utilization of EDW for one-time versus multiple screening cycles and compare the use of HPV co-testing and cervical dysplasia detection rates between groups. Methods Study design and data source/participant eligibility and cohort definitions This was a retrospective cohort study. Data were obtained from Kansas EDW or the NBCCEDP grantee in the state of Kansas. Data were reviewed for patients who underwent cervical cancer screening through EDW between January 2001 and December 2021. Patients were included within the singly screened cohort if their unique participant ID was documented as only having completed one screening cycle. Patients whose participant IDs were associated with two or more screening cycles in the EDW database were included in the multiply screened cohort. Patients were excluded if Papanicolaou (Pap) test results were not available. The study was reviewed through the University of Kansas Medical Center’s Institutional Review Board (IRB), which is accepted by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE)’s IRB that runs the EDW program (STUDY00149362). A data use agreement was also approved by KDHE for use of de-identified program data for limited research purposes as outlined. Variables The CDC requires collection by NBCCEDP grantees of a standardized minimum set of demographic and clinical data on patients receiving screening and clinical services through the program for monitoring, accountability, and quality improvement purposes [ 15 ]. Data are reported to the CDC twice yearly and summary feedback reports are provided to the state grantees [ 16 ]. Age at screening was calculated as the difference between the patient’s self-reported date of birth and documented date of pap test. Race was self-reported and included white, Black/African American, Asian/Pacific Islander, and American Indian/Alaska Native. Ethnicity was self-reported as Hispanic or not Hispanic such that the Hispanic-identifying population overlapped with previously outlined racial groups. Education level, marital status, income level, and smoking status were also based on self-reported data documented in EDW records. Of note, these data were inconsistently collected prior to 2015 whereas following that time ~ 80% of patients had this demographic information available. This corresponds to the timing from EDW’s transition from paper to electronic database management. Pap test cytology results were documented among the following categories: negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy (NILM), atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US), low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (LSIL), atypical squamous cells, cannot exclude high-grade (ASC-H), high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL), atypical glandular cells (AGC), adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS), and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Human papillomavirus (HPV) test results were documented as positive or negative, including whether high-risk genotype subtyping was performed, and the indication for HPV testing (e.g., indicated for co-testing per guidelines for women aged 30 and above versus reflex testing for an abnormal cytology result). Outcomes and statistical analysis The rate of eligible patients screened through EDW was assessed. In Kansas, patients are eligible for cervical cancer screening through EDW if they are age 21–65, have a cervix, have income at less than or equal to 250% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL), and do not have health insurance. The total eligible screening population for each year of the study was determined using data from the Census Bureau’s Small Area Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) database [ 17 ]. SAHIE is a model-based estimates program that leverages data from U.S. Census Bureau nationwide household surveys the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS ASEC; before 2008) and the American Community Survey (ACS; since 2008) [ 18 ]. These data are merged with auxiliary anonymized administrative records (e.g., federal income tax returns, Medicaid participation) and census population data to estimate single-year health insurance coverage by age, race, and income at the county and state level across the USA [ 18 ]. County-level estimates are adjusted to sum to match the state-level estimates [ 18 ]. Advantages of this database include increased precision by triangulating survey estimates with additional data sources and its level of detail for demographic subgroups of importance to NBCCEDP nationally and EDW locally [ 18 ]. The Census Bureau website provides further detail on the SAHIE model [ 17 ]. The size of the eligible population is reported with 90% confidence intervals to address survey sampling error using the SAHIE model with 2020 data as previously described [ 17 ]. The eligible population for cervical cancer screening from SAHIE was compared to the number of unique cervical cancer screening events for a more recent subsection of the study period (2014–2021) given that SAHIE eligible population estimates for our study population (female patients in the state of Kansas between ages 21 and 64 with income ≤ 250% of FPL) was not reported by SAHIE prior to 2014. The total percentage of eligible patients ever-screened was determined by summing the total number of unique patients screened through EDW from 2001 to 2020 and dividing by the eligible population size from SAHIE. Patients who had multiple screening cycles were only counted once in the numerator. Screening rates were determined in a similar fashion by age, race/ethnicity, and by county using a similar method. The total percentage of eligible patients up-to-date with cervical cancer screening in 2020 was determined by summing the total number of patients screened through EDW between 2017 and 2020 (i.e., those who had a cytology result within the recommended screening interval of 3 years) and dividing by the eligible population size for the year 2020 from SAHIE. Given that assessment of the ever-screened and up-to-date with screening rates were assessed cross-sectionally for the year 2020 only, we used only the 2020 count of eligible patients from SAHIE rather than averaging over the study period. We chose 2020 rather than 2021 as the time point for cross sectional evaluation to minimize the risk of bias due to incomplete or in-process data reporting in the most recent year of the study period due to lags in data reporting common in the CDC program. Our screening rates were calculated assuming a recommended 3 year interval for screening given that the vast majority of the study population was screened with pap smear cytology alone with only a small subset undergoing co-testing with pap smear cytology and HPV testing together. The up-to-date screening rate was also assessed by demographic subgroups in a similar manner. County-level ever-screened and up-to-date screening rates were plotted on a heat map to illustrate geographic differences. Similar county-level heat maps were then constructed using this data at the initiation, midpoint, and endpoint of the study period. Eligibility rates were compared across age, race, and geographic region. Singly and multiply screened cohorts were defined by the presence of one versus two or more screening cycles per participant ID with completed pap test screening results. Differences in demographic variables between the singly and multiply screened cohorts were calculated using student’s t test or Chi-square test as appropriate for continuous and categorical variables respectively. The difference in proportion of cytology results was assessed using Chi-square test. Missing data were excluded from our analysis. All data analyses were performed using SAS ® software, version 9.4 released March 30, 2021. Statistical significance was set as p -value alpha of 0.05. Results EDW reported between 2,739 and 4,580 screening episodes per year from 2001 to 2021. In 2014, 79,648 ± 3,942 uninsured patients between ages 21 and 64 were eligible for cervical cancer screening or 25% of this demographic group. The eligible population decreased in 2015 to 66,455 ± 3,762 patients (21.8%), but thereafter the eligible population remained stable between 21–22% of the demographic group. In 2020, 58,582 patients (21.6%) were eligible for cervical cancer screening through EDW ( Fig. 1 ). Figure 2A shows the county-level regional distribution of low-income uninsured women within the state of Kansas. The proportion of eligible patients per county ranged from 12.3% (± 4.1%) to 38.3% (± 8.2%) over the twenty-year period. The largest proportion of eligible patients reside in the West service region of EDW relative to Central, Northeast, and Southeast regions. Interestingly, multiple counties with high numbers of eligible patients in the West region do not have providers registered and contracted to perform EDW screenings located in the county. Figure 3 maps the proportion of eligible patients who ever received cervical cancer screening through EDW ( Fig. 3A ) and who were up-to-date with cervical cancer screening through EDW ( Fig. 3B ) in 2020 by county. By 2020, EDW completed one prior lifetime screening event for 25,518 of 58,582 (43.56%) including 14,037 of 24,662 (56.9%) of patients aged 40–64. 10,193 of 58,582 (17.4%) eligible patients were up-to-date with cervical cancer screening through EDW in 2020 including 5,000 of 24,662 (20.3%) of patients aged 40–64. Rural patients were less likely to have EDW screening. Of note, only 7.1% of eligible patients under age 40 were screened whereas over half of patients aged 40–65 were screened ( Fig. 4 ). White, Black, and Hispanic subgroups all had ever-screened rates between 70 and 80%, and there was no significant difference in up-to-date screening by race/ethnicity. Between 2001 and 2021, 43,916 eligible patients received cervical cancer screening through EDW. Table 1 reviews the demographic characteristics of this population, comparing patient cohorts who had one versus multiple screening cycles. Of 43,916 patients screened, 29,278 (66.7%) had only one screening cycle, and 14,638 (33.3%) had multiple screening cycles as depicted in Fig. 5 . The overall median number of screening cycles was 2.45; among those with multiple cycles, patients had an average of 4–5 screening episodes as shown in Fig. 5 . Patients with multiple screening cycles more often reported Hispanic ethnicity and more often had lower levels of education. There were no significant differences in age or annual income between groups. There was a statistically significant but only small absolute difference in the proportions of cytology results between groups ( Table 1 ). The vast majority of screening results in both groups were negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy (86.47% vs. 85.85%). Patients with only one screening episode had a larger proportion of high-grade dysplasia (2.07% vs. 1.41%), whereas proportions of low-grade dysplasia were similar (9.69% vs. 9.67%). Overall fewer than 20% of screened patients had HPV testing performed in a population in which over 80% of patients were aged 30 and above and therefore recommended to undergo HPV testing per 2019 ASCCP guidelines. 8.9% of patients aged 30 and above had HPV testing in 2018 (prior to release of the 2019 guidelines. This increased over time but remained a small overall proportion of the eligible population. 11.1% of patients aged 30 and above had HPV testing in 2019, which increased to 18% of patients in 2020 and 22.5% of patients in 2021. Patients with one screening cycle were more likely to have HPV testing completed relative to multiply screened patients (30.02% vs. 7.9%). However, a larger proportion of multiply screened patients who had HPV testing performed had an abnormal test result. Discussion This study characterized the reach of NBCCEDP in a non-Medicaid expansion state among low-income uninsured patients and assessed differences in utilization of cervical cancer screening services and screening results by demographic factors and uniquely as a function of single versus multiple screening cycles. The eligible population in Kansas for EDW cervical cancer screening exhibited an absolute decline of 3.2% or a relative decline of 16.6%, which is considerably less than the 5.1% absolute and 38.6% decline reported for non-expansion states nationally [ 19 ]. Over a 20-year period, EDW screened 43,450 patients, or 74% of the eligible population in Kansas in 2020. However, only 17% of eligible patients in 2020 were up-to-date with cervical cancer screening or completed a pap test within the preceding three years and only 3.8% of patients up-to-date with screening were under age 40. Approximately, one-third of the screened population was re-screened through EDW with the vast majority of rescreening results were negative for cytologic abnormalities. HPV-based testing and co-testing were infrequently used in EDW though use increased following publication of the 2019 ASCCP guidelines. The CDC, led by Tangka et al. [ 20 ] has assessed both the size of the eligible population and reach of NBCCEDP for cervical cancer screening longitudinally since 1999, including analysis before and after passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) at the national and state levels. Between 1999–2001 and 2010–2012 the growth of eligible population for cervical cancer screening outpaced increases in the number of patients screened, causing a significant decline in the proportion served of the eligible population by the program [ 8 ]. In contrast, the eligible population shrunk from 2011 to 2017 with the greatest decline after 2014 in Medicaid expansion states [ 19 ]. In Kansas, from 2011 to 2017 the eligible population decreased from 88,000 to 54,000, but there was a subsequent increase in the eligible population to 58,582 or 21.6% of the demographic group in 2020. This reversal further emphasizes the potential for increased strain on the healthcare system in the absence of Medicaid expansion. Several factors coalesce to explain the mixed trend in Kansas. References [ 9 , 19 ] demonstrated that even non-Medicaid expansion states had a decrease in the size of the eligible population from 2011 to 2017 though to a significantly lesser degree than Medicaid expansion states. EDW-eligible patients with income between 100 and 250% FDL had access to premium tax credits to support private health insurance purchases on the ACA marketplace (ACA ref), and the ACA-mandated tax penalty further disincentivized uninsured status (ACA ref). The unemployment rate also declined in this time period [ 21 ]. At a national level, it is estimated that approximately 6.5% of the eligible population receives screening through NBCCEDP [ 8 ]. This proportion varies widely by state from 1.5 to 32.7% of the eligible population screened in a given three-year eligibility period [ 8 ]. Our data suggest that Kansas ranks just over the fiftieth percentile in terms of state-level penetration. Nationally, a greater proportion of patients age 40–64 are screened relative to those 18–39 with previously estimated proportions screened of 5–73.2% versus 0.001–22.4%, respectively [ 8 ]. Screening in Kansas parallels this trend as utilization of EDW services is primarily driven by screening of patients age 40–65. Fewer than 25% of eligible patients ages 18–39 utilized EDW screening in Kansas, which is among the bottom half of proportions among U.S. States [ 8 ]. However, since 2020 EDW has increased funding for cervical cancer screening for patients age 21–39, which likely explains the subsequent increase in the percentage of the eligible population screened in subsequent years. WHO proposed as part of its triple intervention strategy for global cervical cancer elimination screening at least 70% of women using a high-performance test once by age 35 and a second time by age 45 to facilitate treating at least 90% of identified cervical pre-cancers (WHO) [ 22 ]. NBCCEDP’s initial strategy prioritized cervical cancer screening for patients age 45–65 to align the age ranges for breast and cervical cancer screening to leverage synergies and assuming that younger patients had other programs/resources by which to obtain screening [ 8 , 23 ]. This implementation strategy poorly aligns with our understanding of cervical carcinogenesis. Although the median age at diagnosis for HPV-associated cervical cancer is 50, cervical cancer rates begin to increase in the mid-thirties with the highest age adjusted rate in the 40–49 age group [ 24 – 26 ]. Working backwards, cervical pre-cancers peak between 25 and 35 [ 27 ] following acquisition of an oncogenic HPV infection between ages 18 and 26 [ 28 ]. In our sample, only 16.3% of patients were screened prior to age 40. There is value in screening between age 40 and age 65 in order to prevent cervical cancer in those age 65 and above, as the 40–65 age group is underscreened [ 29 ] and cervical cancers at age 65 and above constitute 20% of all cervical cancers with disproportionate mortality [ 26 , 30 ]. However, this screening window is shifted 10–15 years too late to prevent the majority of cervical cancers and patients who are never or rarely screened tend to be diagnosed with more advanced cervical cancers at younger ages [ 31 ]. To date, there has been limited characterization of NBCCEDP eligibility and utilization with local granularity beyond the state level. Hughes et al. [ 32 ] performed similar analysis to quantify breast cancer screening utilization at the local level in Minnesota and identified local utilization clusters that corresponded to Indigenous reservations and proximity to an academic medical center across county lines. Our results also demonstrate the importance of local analysis in program evaluation. In a retrospective analysis at the national level, program- and state-level factors associated with lower rates of utilization of NBCCEDP services included having a larger eligible population, higher average cost of service delivery, and greater concentration of the eligible population in urban areas [ 33 ]. The situation in Kansas runs counter to these trends in that Kansas does not rank among the top half of states in terms of size of the eligible population and most of the Kansans underscreened population resides in rural areas. Some state NBCCEDP programs can overcome large and hard-to-reach populations in urban areas by consolidating resources and achieving economies of scale [ 33 ]. It is difficult to compensate in a similar manner in rural areas due to a lesser intensity of patient navigation, regional nurse local practice support, and consistently long turnaround time for billing and collections. This creates a mismatch between a large proportion of the eligible population and available resources that is difficult to overcome despite the mixed centralized-decentralized structure of EDW that is associated with lower screening costs in other states [ 34 ]. Relatively few studies have investigated the clinical utility of offering multiple screening cycles through NBCCEDP for cervical cancer. Trivers et al. [ 13 ] investigated rates of repeat Pap testing (within 9 months) versus immediate colposcopy for abnormal cytology results and found that the age standardized rate of repeat Pap testing was 37.2 per 1,000 with younger and Black/Hispanic women more likely to instead receive colposcopic biopsy. Of note, this study preceded both the 2012 and 2019 revisions to ASCCP guidelines and thus assessed much shorter follow-up intervals than current standard of care. Nevertheless, this established that within NBCCEDP there was a trend toward more aggressive use of diagnostic testing, conceivably to hasten time to diagnostic resolution of abnormal screening results and facilitate expedient follow-up in never or rarely screened populations. More recently, Bartley et al. [ 14 ] reassessed screening intervals in NBCCEDP in the context of updated guidelines from ASCCP in 2012 to USPSTF in 2018. They found that 41.2% of tests were rescreens and found that the median screening interval increased from 2.02 years in 2010 to 3.88 in 2018 [ 14 ]. This represents a higher proportion of rescreens (here we report a median of 2 cycles) than we report in the present study. At face value, this approach appears to align with national guidelines [ 11 ] and align with health service delivery goals to increase screening while minimizing false positives and/or overdiagnosis and workup [ 13 , 14 ]. Yet even the above analysis falls short of optimally rigorous interrogation of guidelines concordance and clinical value of NBCCEDP cervical cancer screening. Rockwell et al. [ 35 ] retrospectively reviewed cervical cancer screening claims for commercially insured Virginians and found that low value screening (defined as screening encounters not concordant with ASCCP and/or USPSTF guidelines) constituted 34% of reimbursements and was associated with minimal patient cost-sharing, while patients with high-value screening follow-up needs for colposcopy and related cervical services incurred non-trivial out-of-pocket expenses. Review of our data reveals 1.3% of screening encounters for patients younger than 21 and 2.4% of screening encounters for patients older than 65 suggesting opportunity to reallocate finite EDW resources. Of note, low-grade and high-grade cytologic atypia were only minimally more prevalent among the multiply screened cohort relative to the singly screened cohort, suggesting that patients receiving multiple screening cycles through EDW do not represent a clinically higher risk population and may just have greater awareness and/or access to available program services. Future studies should further characterize the expected clinical utility and yield of results in multiple screening cycles. This analysis will only grow in importance as additional data following implementation of 2019 ASCCP guidelines mature. In our cohort, there was minimal use of HPV-based testing for primary screening or co-testing across the study period, which mirrors data for NBCCEDP at the national level where only 2.9% of patients had HPV co-testing performed [ 14 ]. However, this increased to 22.5% 2 years following publication of the 2019 ASCCP guidelines. This parallels data previously reported. Goding Sauer et al. [ 36 ] demonstrated lower co-testing rates in Kansas relative to the national average in 2016. Subsequent data from Dorismond et al. [ 37 ] that reported 78% utilization of co-testing in eligible patients from 2019 to 2020 in NBCCEDP Region 7, which includes Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, and Iowa, placing the region fourth of ten in terms of highest co-testing utilization. Previous studies have demonstrated regional variation in use of co-testing with lower utilization in the Midwest and South relative to the Northeast [ 36 ] and with additional variation based on provider and clinic/facility preferences more than it is based on patient characteristics [ 38 ]. There has been limited prior consideration of outcomes and relative advantages and/or disadvantages of different cervical cancer screening strategies within NBCCEDP at the national or state level. Pap tests or cervical cytology-based testing differentiate between normal cells, low-grade abnormalities indicative of the presence of HPV infection, and high-grade abnormalities that are immediately suggestive of a precancerous lesion likely requiring treatment [ 39 ]. Cytology is specific in identifying pre-cancer, but its sensitivity is poor as cytology fails to detect 30–50% of existing precancerous lesions at the time of screening [ 40 , 41 ]. In contrast, HPV testing has a sensitivity of 90% [ 42 ] and its high negative predictive value formed the basis for extending screening intervals to five years for negative results in the 2019 ASCCP guidelines [ 43 , 44 ]. Given that HPV testing identifies pre-cancers earlier than cytology alone, the rate of abnormal results is higher (10% versus 6%); however, given the recommended follow-up of repeat testing in one year, there is not a significant increase in rates of colposcopy referral [ 45 ]. Co-testing (cervical cytology with HPV testing) has similar specificity (detecting 90% of pre-cancers and cancers) and has slightly higher sensitivity detecting five additional cancers per million patients screened [ 42 , 46 , 47 ]. One downside to co-testing is that it prevents five additional cervical cancers and two deaths but with 50% greater false-positive results and colposcopies [ 48 ]. However, serial screening with co-tests confers greater reassurance with no cancers and few pre-cancers found in one study of 990,013 after having had two negative co-tests [ 49 , 50 ]. Taken together, the evidence shows that primary HPV testing detects more pre-cancers [ 43 , 44 ], can be performed less frequently [ 11 , 45 , 51 , 52 ], and aids in surveillance of prior screening test abnormalities [ 11 ]. If cytology testing alone is used, one-time screening is inadequate, and serial screening at no more than three-year intervals for at least one to two decades is required to effectively prevent development of cervical cancer [ 53 , 54 ]. However, there are cost differentials to consider with each screening approach. EDW’s reimbursement schedule pays out $20–$25 per cytology test and $35–41 per HPV test, making the cost per co-testing encounter between $55 and 66. Further research is required to better evaluate effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of screening within NBCCEDP and EDW to determine the optimal cervical cancer screening modality and strategy. The strengths of this study lie in its novel and detailed analysis of patterns within multiple screening cycles that has not been previously analyzed. NBCCEDP and EDW results have high concordance with medical records [ 13 ] and are verifiable and verified in contrast to the majority of survey and retrospective studies that rely on patient self-report of cervical cancer screening completion and outcomes. We also leveraged the SAHIE database from the U.S. Census Bureau which has greater accuracy relative to the more commonly used Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS ASEC) and the American Community Survey (ACS) due to its triangulation of survey estimates with administrative record and census data at the county and state levels [ 18 ]. Limitations of this study also stem from the data sources in terms of its retrospective nature, missing data within the minimal data elements of EDW/NBCCEDP data collection [ 13 ], and SAHIE model error and sampling error (which are reflected by the reliability of its confidence intervals) and non-sampling error, which is difficult to estimate [ 18 ]. There also are no verifiable data sources to permit assessment of underinsured patients in the state of Kansas and assess cervical cancer screening results and cycles that EDW patients may have received from non-EDW providers and screening encounters. In conclusion, EDW reaches and maintains up-to-date cervical cancer screening for less than one-fourth of eligible Kansans, and young and rural patients are underserved. HPV testing remains underutilized relative to expected levels based on the 2019 ASCCP guidelines. It is unclear whether multiple screening cycles increase diagnosis of high-grade dysplasia given use of cytology-only screening primarily in patients aged 40–64. Increasing utilization of HPV testing in patients age 30–65 would increase the negative predictive value of one-time and serial screening. Needs assessment, clinical outcomes modeling, and cost-effectiveness studies can help guide program efforts to increase NBCCEDP’s reach among younger and rural patients.