Introduction Importance of lowering LDL - C levels Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of mortality globally. In 2022 alone, CVDs accounted for approximately one-third of all global deaths, with atherosclerotic CVD (ASCVD) responsible for almost two-thirds of all CVD cases. 1 The most recent data on the burden of CVDs showed that Central Europe, Eastern Europe, and Central Asian regions have the highest levels of CVD mortality worldwide. 1 ASCVD is a chronic inflammatory disease in which hypercholesterolaemia plays a central role. Mendelian randomization studies have highlighted the role of LDL cholesterol (LDL - C) in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques and subsequent cardiovascular (CV) events. 2 , 3 Additionally, genetic evidence has shown that long-term exposure to lower LDL - C levels is associated with a reduction in the risk of coronary heart disease. 4 , 5 For these reasons, CVD prevention efforts focus on reducing LDL - C levels through lifestyle interventions and medications. 6 7 Lipid-lowering therapies Effective lipid-lowering therapies (LLTs) are essential for preventing CVD as lowering LDL - C promotes the regression of atherosclerotic plaque and significantly reduces the risk of future CV events. Data indicate that a 1.0 mmol/L reduction in LDL - C is associated with a decrease in the relative risk of a major CV event by up to 23%, 8–11 regardless of the initial CV risk. 12 , 13 This association persists even with very low levels of LDL - C, with cumulative benefits observed over time. 12 , 14 , 15 International guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemia reflect these findings. 16 The 2019 update of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European Atherosclerosis Society (EAS) guidelines recommends an LDL - C reduction of ≥50% from baseline and an LDL - C goal of <1.4 mmol/L (55 mg/dL) for patients at very high CV risk and <1.8 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) for patients at high CV risk. 8 , 17 Across guidelines, the current proposed stepwise treatment strategy to reach LDL - C goals consists of first-line statin monotherapy at the highest recommended/tolerated dose, followed by the sequential addition of ezetimibe and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)-targeted therapy in patients who do not achieve their risk-based LDL - C goals. 8 However, despite mounting evidence showing the CV risk–benefit of lowering LDL - C and the growing therapeutic armamentarium available, current real-world data show a large gap between guideline recommendations and clinical practice. 8 , 17–21 To overcome the CV risk associated with inadequate lipid management, the treatment paradigm has shifted from the concept of ‘high-intensity statins’ to that of ‘high-intensity, lipid-lowering therapy’, preferably as upfront combination LLT. 22–24 25–29 Statins: the cornerstone of lipid management Statins are highly effective LLTs that represent the cornerstone of lipid management, alone or in combination with other LLTs. By inhibiting the hepatic enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, statins lower the intracellular levels of cholesterol and induce the upregulation of LDL receptors (LDLRs), which then results in an increased uptake of circulating LDL - C. 8 , 31 , 32 Currently, seven statins are available for clinical use at various doses (lovastatin, simvastatin, fluvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin, and pitavastatin) categorized as low, moderate, and high intensity based on the extent to which they lower LDL - C when used as monotherapy (≤30%, 30–50%, and ≥50%, respectively; 8 ). Table 1 The clinical benefit of a statin is driven by absolute LDL - C reduction; therefore, the type of statin prescribed should reflect the treatment goals for a given patient. 8 , 33 Large-scale evidence from randomized trials and meta-analyses has proved that statins are highly effective in reducing CV risk in primary and secondary prevention. 8 Statin-associated muscle symptoms (SAMSs) are the most commonly reported adverse effects 34–38 ; another known adverse effect of statins includes an increase in the risk of new-onset diabetes mellitus. 39 8 Table 1 Categories and doses of statins 30 Low-intensity dosage Moderate-intensity dosage High-intensity dosage Statins (LDL - C reduction <30%) (LDL - C reduction 30% to <50%) (LDL - C reduction ≥50%) Atorvastatin — 10–20 mg 40–80 mg Fluvastatin 20–40 mg 40 mg twice/day; 80 mg — Lovastatin 20 mg 40–80 mg — Pitavastatin — 1–4 mg — Pravastatin 10–20 mg 40–80 mg — Rosuvastatin — 5–10 mg 20–40 mg Simvastatin 10 mg 20–40 mg — LDL - C, LDL cholesterol. Statin intolerance In patients treated with statins, wide treatment variability has been reported based on the type and dose of statin, as well as individual response differences. Statin intolerance can be defined as complete (inability to tolerate any dose of any statin) or partial (inability to tolerate statins at the recommended dose necessary to achieve the patient-specific therapeutic objective) based on the National Lipid Association's and International Lipid Expert Panel definitions. 40–42 To classify a patient as having statin intolerance, a minimum of two statins should have been attempted, including at least one at the lowest approved daily dosage. 43 , 44 Observational studies suggest a high proportion of patients have low adherence to statin treatment, 43 , 45 and at least one-third stop taking prescribed statins within 12 months of initiation because of perceived adverse events. 46 Despite this, only a small number, <5% of patients, experience complete statin intolerance. 38 , 47 Up to 50% of patients may misattribute physical injury and myopathies to SAMS, resulting in patients unnecessarily stopping statin treatment. 48 Nevertheless, failure to maintain patients on treatment is an independent risk factor for CV events. 48 49 , 50 Ezetimibe Ezetimibe is an oral medication that blocks the intestinal absorption of dietary and biliary cholesterol by targeting the Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 protein. In response to the reduced amount of cholesterol delivered, the liver increases the clearance of LDL - C from the blood. 51 As monotherapy, ezetimibe was found to lower plasma LDL - C by ∼18% 51 ; however, the greatest benefit is observed when ezetimibe is used in combination with statins—it can provide an additional 13–24% reduction in LDL - C levels, working synergistically. 52 Ezetimibe has a demonstrated safety profile comparable with statin monotherapy or placebo. 53 , 54 The dyslipidaemia guidelines recommend the addition of ezetimibe to background statin therapy as the second-line treatment owing to its benefit in CV risk reduction and tolerability, as seen in clinical trials and meta-analyses. 52 , 54 , 55 Unfortunately, ezetimibe is severely underused, with only 17% of patients at CV risk receiving ezetimibe in combination with statins, despite being available as a generic therapy since 2017. 8 , 17 , 55 , 56 24 , 57 Bempedoic acid Bempedoic acid, a once-daily, oral LLT reduces LDL - C levels via competitive inhibition of the hepatic ATP citrate lyase, a key enzyme in the cholesterol synthesis pathway that acts upstream of HMG-CoA, the target of statins. Its formulation as a prodrug, activated primarily in the liver, allows for action in hepatocytes but not in myocytes, with the potential to decrease the risk of SAMS compared with statin therapy. 58 Clinical studies have extensively proved the efficacy of bempedoic acid in reducing LDL - C levels by 17−23% when combined with maximally tolerated statins. 59 In clinical trials, bempedoic acid showed a good safety profile, with an incidence of muscular and serious adverse events comparable to placebo. Notably, an increase in gout, cholelithiasis, and tendon rupture has been observed with the use of bempedoic acid compared with placebo control. Additionally, laboratory abnormalities, such as increases in blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and uric acid, as well as decreases in haemoglobin, have been reported. However, these were found to be transitory and reversible upon drug discontinuation. Importantly, no increase in new-onset diabetes was observed. 60–63 64 , 65 More recently, the Cholesterol Lowering via Bempedoic Acid, an ACL-Inhibiting Regimen (CLEAR) Outcomes trial found that among patients with statin intolerance at high and very high CV risk, treatment with bempedoic acid was associated with a 21% reduction in LDL - C levels and a 13% lower risk of major adverse CV events (four-component major adverse CV events: death from CV causes, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, or coronary revascularization) compared with placebo after a median of 40.6 months. Of note, the CV benefit observed with bempedoic acid was proportional to the absolute LDL - C reduction. 66 Additionally, the occurrence of new-onset or worsening of diabetes mellitus and tendinopathies did not differ meaningfully between bempedoic acid and placebo groups. 66 Following these findings, in 2024, the US Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency approved the label update for bempedoic acid and its fixed-dose combination with ezetimibe to reduce the risk of CV events in patients with established or who were at high risk of ASCVD. 66 Bempedoic acid is prescribed as monotherapy at a fixed dose of 180 mg or as a fixed-dose combination therapy with ezetimibe 10 mg, both orally and once daily. 67 , 68 However, owing to the timing of the availability of bempedoic acid and the publication of the latest ESC/EAS guideline update, bempedoic acid is currently not included in the proposed treatment algorithm, but it was briefly mentioned as a future therapeutic option. Nevertheless, recommendations for its use have been proposed in several expert opinion papers, including the 2023 position paper of the International Lipid Expert Panel and local European guidelines. 67 , 68 Despite positive results and agencies’ approvals, bempedoic acid is still unavailable in many European and non-European countries. 8 , 69–72 73 PCSK9-targeted therapy PCSK9 is a protein that increases plasma LDL - C levels by binding LDLRs on the surface of hepatocytes and inducing their degradation. Therefore, the inhibition of PCSK9 increases the expression of LDLR and reduces the plasma levels of LDL - C. 74 In recent years, the development of compounds that modulate the activity of PCSK9 has played a central role in dyslipidaemia management. 74 Evolocumab and alirocumab are two human monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that target the catalytic domain of PCSK9 and prevent it from binding to LDLR. 74 By reducing LDL - C levels, evolocumab and alirocumab can reduce the risk of ASCVD events in very high-risk populations, as shown in the Further Cardiovascular OUtcomes Research with PCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects with Elevated Risk (FOURIER) and the Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcomes After an Acute Coronary Syndrome During Treatment With Alirocumab (ODYSSEY Outcomes) studies, respectively. 75 , 76 Additionally, the Effects of the PCSK9 Antibody Alirocumab on Coronary Atherosclerosis in Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction (PACMAN-AMI) trial investigated the effect of the alirocumab plus statin therapy on plaque burden and composition, and found that among patients ( 15 , 75 , 76 N = 300) with acute myocardial infarction undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention, the addition of alirocumab to high-intensity statin therapy resulted in significantly greater plaque regression, lipid regression, and thickening of the fibrous cap. In a subsequent study, the coronary plaque changes observed were independently associated with favourable CV outcomes at 1 year. 77 Both mAbs are administered via biweekly or monthly subcutaneous injections and can induce a reduction in LDL - C levels of up to 60%. 78 75 , 76 An alternative strategy is provided by inclisiran, a small interfering RNA that reduces PCSK9 expression and has shown comparable lipid-lowering effects (44−54%) following twice-yearly subcutaneous injections. Clinical trials that have assessed the efficacy and safety of PCSK9-targeted therapies have shown a favourable safety profile, with reports of mild side effects, such as injection-site reactions, nasopharyngitis, and upper respiratory tract infections. However, these agents are expensive; they are mostly used within local reimbursement criteria that are very limited, and their use in clinical practice is still recommended as a third option. 79–81 8 , 17 Benefits of combination therapy Real-world studies have shown that most patients still fail to achieve their recommended LDL - C target levels, despite the armamentarium of LLT available. In Europe, the EU-Wide Cross-Sectional Observational Study of Lipid-Modifying Therapy Use in Secondary and Primary Care (DA VINCI) study (2017–2018) and the Treatment of high and very high riSk dyslipidaemic pAtients for the preveNTion of cardiOvasculaR events in Europe—a multInatioNal observatIonal (SANTORINI) study (2020—2021), including its 1-year prospective follow-up until May 2022, showed that 67% and 68% of patients did not achieve their LDL - C goal, respectively. In both studies, statin-based monotherapy was the most used LLT (DA VINCI: 84%; SANTORINI: 50%). Similar scenarios have been reported around the globe. For example, in Canada, a retrospective observational study based on administrative health system data of adult patients with ASCVD ( 22 , 82 N = 219 488) from the province of Alberta (2010—2017) showed that among those receiving any LLT ( N = 144 607), 60.6% were treated with moderate- to high-intensity statins and, of these, 33.9% did not meet local guideline-recommended LDL - C levels (2.0 mmol/L nor a 50% reduction in LDL - C). The Getting to an ImprOved Understanding of Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol and Dyslipidaemia Management (GOULD) was a prospective, multicentre, observational registry study aimed to evaluate the LDL - C treatment patterns in a population of ASCVD patients in the United States over 2 years (2018–2020). At baseline, among 5006 patients included, 85.4% were treated with statins, of which 43.6% were receiving high-intensity statins, and 6.7% of patients had LDL - C levels at goal. Despite the increase in the proportion of patients achieving their goals after 2 years of treatment (from 6.7% to 31.7%), there remained over two-thirds of patients with residual CV risk, which could be attributable to a lack of combination therapy use as 83.7% of patients were still treated with statin. 83 , 84 Furthermore, of the 2364 high-risk patients analysed in the Brazilian Rapid Early Action for Coronary Treatment (REACT) cross-sectional observational and prospective registry (2010−2011), 72.6% received statins despite 20–30% of patients having LDL - C levels ≥100 mg/dL. 85 86 Monotherapy may be insufficient to reach LDL - C goals, but a three-fold increase in patients achieving their LDL - C goals is seen with combination therapy compared with statin monotherapy. 24 , 87 This is substantiated by the fact that a doubling of statin dose was found to only increase LDL - C reduction by 4–7%, 88 which is considerably less effective than adding a second agent. Furthermore, using agents with different modes of action can enhance the effect on lipid metabolism (via additive or synergistic mechanisms). Early and potent LDL - C lowering is crucial to prevent future CV events, regardless of the LLT used. 89 Strategies that implement combination therapies in the early stages may help patients reach their LDL - C goals and prevent future CV events, especially in high- and very high-risk patients. 15 , 90 , 91 The benefit of upfront combination therapy has been demonstrated in randomized clinical trials, real-world studies, and simulation studies, which have confirmed not only its effectiveness in attaining LDL - C goals, thereby reducing the risk of side effects and discontinuation, but foremost its ability to reduce CV outcomes and all-cause mortality. 92 A summary of the absolute LDL - C reduction that may be achieved when other LLTs are added to background statin therapy is shown in 22 , 24 , 54 , 75 , 87 , 93 , 94 . Table 2 Table 2 Current options for LDL - C-lowering agents, their combinations, and potential magnitude of LDL - C reduction Strategy Mean ↓LDL - C, % Baseline LDL - C value (mg/dL) to reach the goal of <55 mg/dL based on mean reduction of LDL - C levels Baseline LDL - C value (mg/dL) to reach the goal of <70 mg/dL based on mean reduction of LDL - C levels Ezetimibe 115 18 <67 <85 Moderate-intensity statin 8 30 <78 <100 Ezetimibe + bempedoic acid 69 38 <92 <117 Moderate-intensity statin + ezetimibe 54 45 <100 <127 High-intensity statin 8 50 <110 <140 High-intensity statin + ezetimibe 8 65 <157 <200 High-intensity statin + ezetimibe + bempedoic acid 69 70–75 <183 <233 Ezetimibe + bempedoic acid + PCSK9-targeted therapy a 116 80–85 <275 <350 High-intensity statin + ezetimibe + PCSK9-targeted therapy a 8 85 <367 <467 LDL - C, LDL cholesterol; mAbs, monoclonal antibodies; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9. a The average magnitude of reduction in the LDL - C level varied depending on the mechanism of action of the PCSK9-targeted therapy considered: mAbs: 60%; small interfering RNA: 44–54%. Combination of statin and ezetimibe LDL - C levels could be reduced up to 52% with a moderate-intensity statin plus ezetimibe oral combination therapy. The IMPROVE-IT trial found that when added to simvastatin 40 mg, ezetimibe 10 mg resulted in an additional 24% lowering of LDL - C levels and a proportional 7.2% lower rate of major vascular events compared with statin monotherapy over 7 years. 88 Real world-data show that high-intensity statin monotherapy reduces LDL - C by 50% compared with a 65% reduction when it is added to ezetimibe. 54 Additionally, in a separate simulation study of 2482 patients who did not achieve their 2019 ESC/EAS LDL - C goals in DA VINCI, it was reported that the optimization of statin monotherapy alone would be insufficient for LDL - C goal achievement in these patients, 27 , 43 , 95 but the stepwise addition of ezetimibe resulted in at least twice as many patients achieving their LDL - C goals across all risk categories. 87 87 Combination of statin and PCSK9-targeted therapy In the FOURIER trial, PCSK9-targeted therapy, evolocumab, added to a background of statin therapy, lowered LDL - C by 59% and reduced the risk of CV events by 15% compared with statin monotherapy over a median of 26 months. In the ODYSSEY trial, alirocumab added to a high-intensity statin reduced LDL - C by up to 62.7% and CV events by 15%, compared with high-intensity statin monotherapy. 75 76 Combination of statin, ezetimibe, and PCSK9-targeted therapy LDL - C levels could be reduced by as much as 85% with high-intensity statin triple-combination therapy (plus ezetimibe and PCSK9-targeted therapy). 27 , 88 , 95 Combination of ezetimibe and bempedoic acid In addition to the findings of the recently published CLEAR Outcomes trial, previously discussed, in patients with statin intolerance ezetimibe combined with bempedoic acid is an effective approach to reducing LDL - C, with an expected reduction of ∼38%. 66 27 , 71 , 72 , 96 Statin, ezetimibe, and bempedoic acid Several simulation studies have tested the sequential addition of other LLT to background statin therapy. In the Monte Carlo simulation by Katzmann 87 , 93 , 97 et al ., of 105 577 patients at very high ( 93 N = 76 900) and high CV risk ( N = 28 677), 88% of whom were receiving statin monotherapy, goal achievement increased with the sequential addition of ezetimibe (33.1%) and bempedoic acid (61.9%). Of note, a real-world, prospective, observational study is currently recruiting patients with very high CV risk to investigate whether the addition of bempedoic acid to statin and ezetimibe therapy provides an additional benefit that enables an LDL - C level of <55 mg/dL to be achieved. 93 98 Intensive, upfront combination therapy can help reduce LDL - C to a greater extent than first-line monotherapy. Moreover, upfront statin monotherapy use may contribute to delayed achievement of LDL - C control as many patients experience treatment inertia, 26 and few patients at risk of future CV events have their treatment monitored and intensified, despite remaining above the LDL - C goal. 99 , 100 The baseline data from the real-world SANTORINI study showed that LLT combination therapy was underutilized across Europe (24.0%), and only 20.1% of patients achieved their ESC/EAS risk-based LDL - C goals. 27 , 85 , 101 However, after 1 year of follow-up, a greater use of combination therapy was reported, which resulted in an approximate 16.7% reduction in overall LDL - C and greater achievement of LDL - C goals. 22 24 The evidence gathered through clinical research thus far has been converted into clinical recommendations and consensus statements, beginning with the International Lipid Expert Panel, that recommend combination therapy in patients at high and very high CV risk. However, the use of LLT combination therapy remains severely underused, with many patients still at risk of CV events. 25–28 A retrospective analysis conducted on patients who survived acute myocardial infarction demonstrated that 1 year after discharge, the proportion of patients receiving high-intensity statin therapy (alone or in combination) was lower, which suggests that when ezetimibe is added to the therapy, statin intensity is reduced. This has a negative impact on the potential of combination therapy to increase the number of patients who reach their LDL - C goal. 26 , 27 , 67 , 88 , 95 , 96 102 Need for and development of updated treatment algorithms To align with new evidence and all available therapies to date, this expert narrative review aims to derive and propose treatment algorithms for the pharmacological lowering of LDL - C levels in selected patient populations. These algorithms provide new advice on patient management, which should enable more clinicians to reduce CV risk efficiently and safely through lipid modification. The present treatment algorithms were developed by a multidisciplinary steering committee, including experts across cardiology, lipidology, and endocrinology. The experts were asked to complete a questionnaire that assessed their views on the benefits of combination therapy and the role novel LLTs might play in the planned update of the ESC/EAS guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemia. The committee met in person in March 2024 to critically discuss the integration of new LLTs into the treatment algorithms. The notes and recording of the discussion were used to formulate an initial draft of the treatment algorithms, which were then presented and discussed during a video conference held in June 2024 and chaired by Prof. Klaus Parhofer (Medical Clinic II of the University Hospital of Munich, Ludwig Maximilian University, Grosshadern). All the authors were steering committee members, who decided collectively on the wording of each recommendation. They were also provided with an opportunity to comment on all aspects of the text over several drafts. The algorithms and final version of the paper were approved by all co-authors. Proposed treatment algorithms The CV risk definitions used in the present treatment algorithms align with the 2021 ESC guidelines on CVD prevention. In summary, the Systematic Coronary Risk Evaluation 2 (SCORE 2; for people aged 40–69 years) and SCORE 2 Old Persons models have been integrated. Age is recognized as the major driver of CVD risk, and specific cut-offs are recommended to stratify the patient population into subgroups at low to moderate, high, and very high CV risk. Taken together with considerations of risk modifiers, comorbidities, and patient preferences, this stratification can be used to guide treatment strategies. 7 The risk-based LDL - C goals used in the proposed algorithms align with the 2019 ESC/EAS guidelines, defined as <1.4 mmol/L (55 mg/dL) for patients at very high risk and <1.8 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) for patients at high risk. 7 The focus of this paper is on patients at high and very high CV risk. 8 Separate algorithms were proposed for those at high CV risk, very high CV risk, patients with complete statin intolerance, and patients with partial statin intolerance. Each of the suggested stepwise treatment algorithms considers baseline LDL - C when deciding the initial treatment strategy. 8 , 28 Patients with low to moderate cardiovascular risk Lifestyle interventions and the use of statin monotherapy (if drug therapy is indicated) are recommended for patients with low to moderate CV risk ( ). Figure 1 Figure 1 Treatment algorithm by cardiovascular risk (excluding partial and complete statin intolerance patients). *Maximally tolerated statin. † Monitor LDL - C at 8 ± 4 weeks (first assessment at 4–6 weeks if recent acute coronary syndrome). ‡ PCSK9-targeted therapy may be considered depending on local restrictions. § Triple-combination therapy may be considered in special situations. BA, bempedoic acid; EZE, ezetimibe; LDL - C, LDL cholesterol; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9. Patients with high cardiovascular risk The treatment algorithm for patients at high risk is presented in . These recommendations are mostly expert opinion-based and concern the high ineffectiveness of LDL - C goal achievement with statin monotherapy, following the rules of ‘the lower, the better for longer’, and ‘the earlier in achieving the LDL - C goal, the better’. The use of a moderate- to high-intensity statin in combination with ezetimibe is recommended as the first line of therapy. However, as it is crucial that patients achieve their risk-based LDL - C goals, the subsequent addition of bempedoic acid may be considered for those who do not reach LDL - C levels <70 mg/dL after 8 ± 4 weeks of treatment. Figure 1 Statin therapy should be prescribed at the highest tolerated dose and potency for all patients with high CV risk. Statin monotherapy (at the highest tolerated dose) may be considered as an alternative if the baseline LDL - C level is <140 mg/dL (3.6 mmol/L); however, treatment intensification is warranted if the goals are not achieved. The addition of PCSK9-targeted therapy in patients who do not reach their LDL - C goal at 8 ± 4 weeks may be considered. Special populations, such as those with diabetes or chronic kidney disease (CKD), should receive an upfront high-intensity statin plus ezetimibe combination therapy and, in cases of CKD, atorvastatin preferably, regardless of baseline LDL - C levels, as rosuvastatin is contraindicated in patients with severe renal impairment. 103 Patients with very high cardiovascular risk The use of upfront combination therapy is also recommended for patients at very high CV risk ( ). For those with baseline LDL - C <160 mg/dL, the recommended first-line approach is a statin plus ezetimibe, with the subsequent addition of bempedoic acid and/or PCSK9-targeted therapy if a 50% reduction in LDL - C and the <55 mg/dL LDL - C goal are not achieved. An LDL - C goal <1.0 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL) may be considered for patients with ASCVD who experience a second vascular event within 2 years while on maximally tolerated statin-based therapy. For patients with baseline LDL - C >160 mg/dL, upfront triple-combination therapy with a statin, ezetimibe, and bempedoic acid may be considered, with the addition of PCSK9-targeted therapy in patients who do not reach their LDL - C goal at 8 ± 4 weeks after initiating treatment. Statin therapy should be prescribed at the highest tolerated dose and potency for all patients with very high CV risk. Special populations, such as those with CKD, recurrent ischaemic events, polyvascular disease, and ASCVD, plus an additional risk factor (type 2 diabetes and/or CKD stage 3–4), should receive an upfront high-intensity statin plus ezetimibe combination therapy, regardless of baseline LDL - C levels. In cases of CKD, atorvastatin is preferred regardless of baseline LDL - C levels as rosuvastatin is contraindicated in patients with severe renal impairment. Figure 1 103 Patients with complete statin intolerance The treatment algorithm for patients with complete statin intolerance is presented in . In this group of patients, combination therapy with ezetimibe and bempedoic acid (providing up to 40% LDL - C reduction) is recommended regardless of whether the CV risk is high or very high. For patients at very high CV risk, the subsequent addition of PCSK9-targeted therapy is recommended if the LDL - C goal of <55 mg/dL and the 50% reduction from baseline levels are not achieved at follow-up. For patients with high CV risk, the addition of PCSK9-targeted therapy may also be considered depending on local limitations and availability. Figure 2 Figure 2 Treatment algorithm for patients with complete statin intolerance. Complete statin intolerance is defined as the inability to tolerate any dose of any statin. *Monitor LDL - C at 8 ± 4 weeks. † PCSK9-targeted therapy may be considered depending on local restrictions. BA, bempedoic acid; CV, cardiovascular; EZE, ezetimibe; LDL - C, LDL cholesterol; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9. Patients with partial statin intolerance For patients with partial statin intolerance, the upfront use of a maximally tolerated dose of statin in combination with ezetimibe and bempedoic acid is recommended, regardless of CV risk ( ). For patients at very high CV risk, the subsequent addition of PCSK9-targeted therapy is also recommended if the treatment goals are not reached, whereas it can be considered for patients at high CV risk. Figure 3 Figure 3 Treatment algorithm for patients with partial statin intolerance. Partial statin intolerance is defined as the inability to tolerate statins at the recommended dose necessary to achieve the patient-specific therapeutic objective. *Maximally tolerated statin. For patients with partial statin intolerance, the first step is the addition of both ezetimibe and bempedoic acid, regardless of whether cardiovascular disease risk is high or very high. † Monitor LDL - C at 8 ± 4 weeks. ‡ PCSK9-targeted therapy may be considered depending on local restrictions. BA, bempedoic acid; CV, cardiovascular; EZE, ezetimibe; LDL - C, LDL cholesterol; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9. Who should receive upfront triple-combination therapy? A triple combination of maximally tolerated statin, ezetimibe, and bempedoic acid may be considered as a first-line strategy in patients with very high CV risk, and it is recommended in patients with partial statin intolerance with high and very high CV risk ( ). Further investigation is warranted to support the strength of this recommendation; nevertheless, promising results have been published. Table 3 104 , 105 Table 3 Target patient populations for oral triple-combination therapy (statin, ezetimibe, and bempedoic acid) When first-line, triple-combination therapy should be considered As part of a stepwise intensification algorithm to reach the LDL - C target As a primary approach in patients with partial statin intolerance As initial therapy in selected patients with very high risk and large distance to goal LDL - C, LDL cholesterol. Additional considerations for dyslipidaemia management A number of patient-dependent factors can negatively impact the likelihood of LDL - C goal attainment, such as adherence to medication. Adherence represents one of the main barriers to the long-term control of LDL - C levels through statin therapy, and non-adherence can also result in fatal outcomes. Combination therapy with lower doses of statins and ezetimibe administered as a single pill is one approach to improving adherence, whilst effectively reducing LDL - C levels. 106 Lack of patient awareness may represent another barrier to LDL - C goal achievement. Greater patient understanding of the importance of optimal lipid management can improve outcomes through increased adherence to treatment. 27 , 106 Noteworthily, the study group led by Näslund 107 et al . found that when primary care patients were given a visualization of their carotid ultrasound results (together with brief written information about ASCVD as part of a CV disease prevention programme in Sweden), the CV risk factor burden improved after 1 year of follow-up compared with not informed control. To improve health outcomes, physicians should discuss LDL - C goals and treatment algorithms with their patients. Furthermore, educating patients on their lipid management will allow them to work with their physician to tailor a plan that best suits their needs. 108 Patients who are aware of their LDL - C goals may be more likely to request additional treatment from their treating physicians. LDL - C levels should be monitored 8 ± 4 weeks after a change in therapy and at least yearly in patients on stable treatment. The emergence of treatment-related adverse events may also influence the attainment of LDL - C goals, 109 SAMS being the most common cause of discontinuation of statin therapy. 46 , 47 , 49 , 50 , 110 Physicians’ treatment choices and clinical inertia are additional factors that contribute to the ongoing challenges of ensuring more patients achieve their guideline-recommended LDL - C goals. 39 , 45 Combination therapy constitutes an approach that can overcome these barriers. Combination therapy in single pill form improves adherence, allowing patients who receive combination therapy earlier to stay on treatment for a longer period. 99 Fixed-dose combinations, such as the formulation of bempedoic acid with ezetimibe or a statin with ezetimibe, may be useful for patients who struggle with adherence when using multidrug regimens and/or in patients who require additional LDL - C lowering. 106 In a simulation study, Farnier 111 et al . estimated the reduction in CV events under two intervention scenarios, both following the 2019 ESC/EAS guidelines for treatment with LLT but differentiating based on the statin and ezetimibe formulation used for the combined treatment; in one scenario statin and ezetimibe were given as two separate pills, while in the other, statin plus ezetimibe were used as fixed-dose combination. The study group found that the relative reduction in major adverse cardiovascular events was 5.4% and 6.4% for intervention scenarios 1 and 2, respectively, resulting in a substantial clinical benefit in terms of CV events averted. 97 97 In addition, by using two drugs with different mechanisms of action, it is possible to achieve the LDL - C goals by avoiding the maximum monotherapy doses of either drug, thereby decreasing the prevalence of dose-dependent adverse events. The importance of educating physicians on treatment intensification should not be underestimated when considering how to maximize LDL - C goal achievement. The Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) EuroPath III project, designed to optimize LDL - C management in post-ACS patients, identified key areas of improvement: (1) inappropriate treatment prescribed at discharge; (2) lack of lipid guidance in the discharge letter; (3) inadequate LLT optimization; (4) gaps in guideline knowledge and lack of referral practices for general practitioners; and (5) patients’ concerns about lipid management. 112 , 113 114 Limitations While the benefits of upfront combination LLT are well supported in the literature, it is important to note that the current ESC/EAS guidelines still recommend intensification with statin monotherapy as the first step towards LDL - C lowering. It should also be considered that the guidelines were prepared in 2018/2019 and released in 2019 and, since that time, numerous new data have been published. The algorithms proposed in this review reflect expert opinion, and some limitations apply. The authors acknowledge that local regulations may highly impact the application of these algorithms, but this expert opinion is based on scientific evidence and clinical experience with the view that physicians are free to adapt the recommendations as deemed suitable for their practice. Additionally, the authors recognize that the reimbursement criteria vary between countries and healthcare systems, and certain aspects of the proposed treatment algorithm may not be supported in all circumstances. 8 Conclusions Having considered the recent evidence and real-world data, combination therapy, as the first line of treatment, should be implemented in patients at high or very high CV risk to reach the elusive target of LDL - C goal attainment in these populations.