1 Introduction Cardiovascular diseases account for roughly one-third of all deaths worldwide. Despite numerous advances in the treatment of coronary artery disease (CAD), it remains a leading cause of death in the majority of the world, particularly in developing countries such as India. 1 In the Asia–Pacific region, acute coronary syndrome (ACS), the most severe manifestation of CAD, is responsible for nearly half of all cardiovascular disease deaths. 2 In-hospital ACS mortality has decreased dramatically in the last 60 years, from 30 % to 3–8 % 3 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 However, despite invasive revascularisation treatment, the 5-year mortality rate for ACS patients is currently around 20 % 9 , Dyslipidaemia is a major risk factor for CAD. According to the INTERHEART study, high total cholesterol and high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) are the most important risk factors for CAD both globally and in South Asian countries. 10 Low-density lipoprotein is an independent predictor of CAD and the primary target of dyslipidemia therapies. 11 Although the prevalence of dyslipidemia is decreasing in European countries, it has been increasing in East Asian populations over the last decade. 12 13 , There are no large prospective studies from India that have looked at the relationship between different cholesterol fractions and CAD outcomes. 14 1.1 Lipid-lowering strategies for acute coronary syndrome 1.1.1 Life style modifications Smoking cessation, increased physical activity(moderate physical activity >30 min at least 5 days per week), moderate alcohol intake and a healthy diet have been shown to improve mortality in post-ACS patients. Guidelines recommend lifestyle modification in ACS patients mostly based on population-based cohort studies which have several confounding factors due to unblinding, poor compliance, and failure to detect mortality benefits. Further studies are needed to show the effect of individual dietary factors in reducing mortality. 15 1.1.2 Statins Statins reduce cellular cholesterol by competitively inhibiting 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, mainly in liver cells. It upregulates the LDL receptor activity and decreases blood levels of VLDL, VLDL remnants, IDL, and LDL. It rapidly clears LDL from blood as evident in a study where approximately a 30 % reduction in LDL level within 5 days of ACS event. Apart from reducing cholesterol, it has pleiotropic effects e.g. anti-inflammatory activity, modulation of thrombogenesis, improvement in endothelial dysfunction, and prevention of myocardial injury. Based on LDL reduction statins are further classified as high intensity(≥50 %), moderate intensity (30 %–49 %), and low intensity (<30 %). Atorvastatin 40–80 mg and Rosuvastatin 20–40 mg are high-intensity statins. 16 1. Statin-mediated anti-inflammation: The primary distinction between stable CAD and ACS is that the latter has a higher incidence of new coronary events, and surprisingly, nearly half of these new events are not caused by the culprit lesion. These unstable non-obstructing plaques were discovered to have a high number of monocyte-derived macrophages, macrophage foam cells, and activated T cells, as well as a low number of smooth muscle cells, indicating a potential role for inflammation. Several animal and human studies have conclusively demonstrated the role of statins in reducing inflammation in coronary arteries. 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 Pravastatin reduced CRP levels by up to 40 % in the CARE trial over 5 years. Atorvastatin therapy reduced CRP levels significantly in the MIRACL trial after 16 weeks. 23 , 24 MIRACL (Myocardial Ischemia Reduction with Aggressive Cholesterol Lowering) was the first randomized controlled trial (RCT) that evaluated the effect of statins early after ACS. The highest rate of death and recurrent ischaemic events occur during the initial period of ACS only. It showed that high-dose statin reduces recurrent ischaemic events as well as rehospitalization if started early after ACS. 24 2. Statin-mediated Modulation of Thrombogenesis: The amount of thrombus generation on plaque disruption during ACS is strongly correlated with clinical outcomes. Tissue factor (TF) expression is responsible for this thrombogenesis and TF concentration is much higher in ACS than in stable CAD. Multiple animal and human experimental studies have shown that statins significantly reduced the expression of TF and the extrinsic pathway of the coagulation system. 18 , 20 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 3. Statin Action on Endothelial Dysfunction: In dyslipidaemic patients, decreased levels of nitric oxide (NO) impairs endothelium-mediated vasodilation in coronaries. Statins increase NO levels by reducing oxidized LDL cholesterol. Apart from this, statins also expedite the re-endothelialization process by mobilizing endothelial progenitor cells to denuded endothelium early after the ACS event. Endothelial dysfunction is specifically associated with an unstable form of CAD. It was demonstrated angiographically by exercise and cold pressure testing which causes constriction of culprit lesion in ACS only. 29 4. Statin-mediated Myocardial Protection: Although timely reperfusion is the key factor in reducing recurrent ischaemic events and mortality in ACS, reperfusion also activates an inflammatory response in myocardial cells and causes further damage to the myocardium. 30 , Few animal studies have shown that early initiation of statin decreases reperfusion injury by reducing adhesion molecules on endothelial cells and neutrophilic activation. 31 32 , Acute coronary syndrome patients have 2–6 times increased risk of recurrent ischaemic events compared to CCS. 33 In the Air Force/Texas Coronary Atherosclerosis Prevention Study (AFCAPS/TexCAPS), statin therapy reduced coronary event rates in subjects with high LDL-C and low CRP levels as well as in those subjects displaying low LDL-C and high CRP levels. 34 These findings suggest that lipid-dependent and -independent mechanisms are clinically relevant and that the predominant mechanism may not be the same in patients with distinct clinical presentations. Initially, statins were studied in patients with stable CAD and were found to reduce major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) such as death, MI, re-admission for ACS, and stroke. Patients with myocardial infarction and/or unstable angina were excluded from these trials. 35 Table 1 summarises all clinical trials of statin therapy in ACS to date. Table 1 Summary of randomized clinical trials of statins in acute coronary syndromes. Table 1 Name of Study Number of Patients Duration of follow-up Findings Country MIRACL(24) 3086 16 weeks Atorvastatin, 80 mg/day, reduces recurrent ischaemic events in the first 16 weeks, mostly recurrent symptomatic ischaemia requiring rehospitalisation Europe, Australasia, and North/South America A to Z 36 4497 2 years Early initiation of simvastatin resulted in a favourable trend toward reduction of major cardiovascular events International PACT 37 3408 4 weeks Pravastatin can be given safely within 24 h of ACS A relative risk reduction of 6.4 % favoured allocation to pravastatin but was not statistically significant Australia L-CAD 38 126 2 years After 2 years, 29 patients of 56 patients in group B, but only 16 of 70 patients in group A, experienced a clinical endpoint ( p = 0.005; odds ratio 0.28, confidence intervals 0.13–0.6) Germany PAIS ) 39 99 90 days This pilot study shows that therapy with pravastatin early after an acute coronary event is safe and well tolerated The Netherlands FLORIDA 40 540 1 year Fluvastatin treatment did not affect ischaemia on AECG, nor the occurrence of any major clinical events as compared to placebo The Netherlands LAMIL 41 69 6 months Pravastatin significantly lowered the total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol levels and increased the HDL-cholesterol levels compared to placebo Belgium ESTABLISH 42 70 6 months Early aggressive lipid-lowering therapy by atorvastatin for 6 months significantly reduced the plaque volume in patients with ACS JAPAN PROVE IT TIMI 22 43 4162 2 years Among patients who have recently had an ACS, an intensive lipid-lowering statin regimen provides greater protection against death or major cardiovascular events than does a standard regimen United Kingdom, United States, Australia, Italy, France, Germany, Spain, and Canada RECIFE 44 60 6 weeks Cholesterol reduction with pravastatin initiated early after acute coronary syndromes rapidly improves endothelial function after 6 weeks of therapy Canada PTT 45 77 6 months Early initiation of pravastatin therapy immediately after an acute myocardial infarction significantly decreased the frequency of major cardiac adverse events Turkey CURE-ACS 46 236 12 weeks LDL reduction was done more effectively by 80 mg of atorvastatin compared to 40-mg dose India Priti K et al 47 1027 30 days High-dose atorvastatin (80 mg) led to better ST segment resolution compared to 10 mg dose in STEMI patient undergoing thrombolysis; however no difference in MACE rates at 30 days in both groups India 1.2 Lower is better? Low-density lipoprotein concentrations are reduced by one-third with standard-dose statins, and by half with high-dose statins (40–80 mg atorvastatin or 20–40 mg rosuvastatin daily) 48 , Multiple RCTs and meta-analyses have shown that high-dose statin therapy has a significant benefit in ACS. 49 23 , 24 , 43 , 50 , 51 , 52 High-intensity statins alone reduce LDL-C by approximately 50 %, whereas combination lipid-lowering therapy (high-intensity statin + ezetimibe) reduces LDL-C by approximately 65 %, and it further increases to approximately 85 % when a PCSK9 inhibitor is added to the combination therapy. The rationale behind these lower targets is mainly from some studies where the lowest event rates were in LDL <40 mg/dl (PROVE IT TIMI 22 trial), in LDL <30 mg/dl (subgroup analysis of IMPROVE-IT), in LDL <30 mg/dl (FOURIER trial). Although guidelines recommend a target level of LDL-C < 55 mg/dl, studies throughout the world have shown a very low rate of target achievement. In the DYSIS (Dyslipidemia International Study) study, 53 only 21.7 % and in CEPHEUS (Centralized Pan-Middle East Survey on the under-treatment of hypercholesterolemia) study only 22.8 % were able to meet the target though Asian patients in CEPHEUS were slightly better at 34.9 % 54 55 , 56 AAC/AHA 2018 guidelines recommend target level of LDL-C < 70 mg/dl or <50 % from the baseline levels in high-risk patients, ACC guidelines also emphasize on early start of therapy to improve compliance. The size of the proportional reduction in major vascular events in these meta-analyses is directly proportional to the absolute LDL reduction achieved, with additional benefit from more intensive statin therapy, even if LDL-C is already <20 mg/dl. Regardless of baseline cholesterol concentration, each 39 mg/dl LDL-C reduction reduces the risk of occlusive vascular events by about a fifth, implying that a 78–117 mg/dl reduction would reduce risk by about 40–50 %. These findings suggest that the primary goal for patients at high risk of occlusive vascular events should be to reduce LDL-C as much as possible without increasing the risk of myopathy. High-dose statins (40–80 mg atorvastatin or 20–40 mg rosuvastatin daily) are currently recommended immediately following ACS for rapid and maximum LDL-C reduction. 57 1.3 Acute coronary syndrome patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention High-dose statin before the procedure has shown a significant reduction in MACE and peri-operative myocardial infarction (MI) in a meta-analysis involving 13 RCTs. It has also shown a reduction in contrast-induced acute kidney injury. 58 Both ESC and ACC guidelines recommend pre-procedure loading of high-dose statin. Major RCTs of statin use in ACS patients undergoing PCI are summarised in ( 59 Table 2 ). Table 2 Summary of Statin trials in ACS patients undergoing PCI. Table 2 Study Number of Patients Dose Outcomes Chyrchel et al 60 140 NSTE-ACS Patients 80 mg Atorvastatin 3 days prior to PCI Significant reduction in MACE (8.1 % in Atorvastatin group and 25.9 % in Placebo group) ARMYDA-ACS 61 171 NSTE-ACS Patients 80 mg Atorvastatin 12 h prior to PCI Significant reduction in MACE (5 % in Atorvastatin group and 17 % in Placebo group) Yun et al 62 445 Korean NSTE-ACS Patients 40 mg Rosuvastatin prior to PCI Significant reduction in PMI (Rosuvastatin group 5.8 % vs 11.4 % in Placebo) Yun et al 63 445 Korean NSTE-ACS Patients 40 mg Rosuvastatin prior to PCI Significant reduction in MACE (9.8 % in Rosuvastatin group and 20.5 % in Placebo group) Gao et al 64 117 Chinese female NSTE-ACS Patients Rosuvastatin 20 mg 12 h before angioplasty and 10 mg 2 h pre-procedure MACE rate At 3 months: Rosuvastatin group 1.69 % vs 12.07 % ( p = 0.026) At 6 months: Rosuvastatin group 3.39 % vs 17.24 % Wang et al 65 125 NSTE-ACS Patients Rosuvastatin 20 mg 2–4 h pre-PCI Significant reduction in MACE rate at 30 days (8.1 % in Rosuvastatin group vs 22.2 % in Placebo) ALPACS Jang et al 66 499 Chinese and Korean NSTE-ACS Patients Atorvastatin 80 mg 12 h pre-PCI and 40 mg 2 h post PCI No significant reduction in MACE (15 % vs 16 %) Kim et al 67 475 Korean NSTE-ACS Patients 40 mg Rosuvastatin prior to PCI Significant reduction in infarct size (assessed by SPECT) in Rosuvastatin group) Jiao et al 68 126 Elderly Chinese patients (>70 years old) with NSTE-ACS Rosuvastatin 20 mg 12 h before PCI plus second dose just before PCI At 24 h: the rosuvastatin LDgroup had signiﬁcantly lower increased serum sLox-1, hs-CRP, CK-MB, and cTnI levels (P, 0.05) and lower sLox and hs-CRP (no signiﬁcant difference) At 30 days: decreased BNP ( p < 0.05) and increased LVEF ( p < 0.05) Liu et al 69 120 Chinese patients with NSTE-ACS Atorvastatin 80 mg pre-PCI vs 20 mg pre-PCI LDL-C goal attainment at week 48, 85 % of the high-intensity Atorvastatin group vs 96.7 % achieved the target level (high-intensity group had Higher baseline LDL-C levels and 8.3 % had LDL-C < 1.81 mmol/l) SECURE-PCI 70 4191 Brazilian patients with NSTE-ACS Atorvastatin 80 mg before and 24 h after PCI MACE rate at 30 days Atorvastatin group 6.2 % vs 7.1 % (non-significant) 1.3.1 Ezetimibe The IMPROVE-IT study, which included approximately 18,000 ACS patients, compared simvastatin 40 mg with ezetimibe 10 mg and simvastatin alone. Follow-up was done up to 6 years. The study showed that the addition of ezetimibe provides an additional benefit in ACS patients across all subgroups by a reduction in CV events, rehospitalization, and stroke. It was the first study to show the benefit of non-statin therapy in ACS in LDL reduction as well as clinical outcomes. The diabetic population benefitted more than the non-diabetic population. No significant difference in adverse outcomes was observed in participants who achieved maximum reduction in LDL levels. Patients who achieved both the targets for LDL-C < 70.2 mg/dl and hs-CRp <2 mg/dl had the lowest MACE rates. 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 Though one small, open-label RCT involving approximately 1700 patients failed to show improvement in overall mortality. 75 1.3.2 PCSK9 inhibitors PCSK9 inhibitors are a new class of drugs (evolocumab and alirocumab) that lower LDL-C by preventing LDL receptor destruction. As a result of this action, LDL-C levels can be lowered by up to 50–60 % over and above that achieved by statin therapy alone. Both evolocumab and alirocumab did not reduce inflammatory markers in ACS, however, when added with a high-dose statin, a significant reduction in LDL levels has been found. In the EVACS study, 420 mg SQ evolocumab was given within 24 h of the event, and reduction of LDL <50 mg/dl at 1 month was achieved in >90 % of patients while it was achieved in only 11 % on statin alone. 76 Similarly in the EVOPACS study, mean LDL levels after 4-week therapy were approximately 40 mg/dl, and >95 % of patients achieved the target. 77 EVACS (Evolocumab in Acute Coronary Syndrome) and EVOPACS (Evolocumab for Early Reduction of LDL Cholesterol Levels in Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes) are the only two studies to date that evaluated the effects of PCSK9 inhibitors during index hospitalization of ACS. Subgroup analysis in post–MI patients of the FOURIER trial showed a significant reduction in combined primary outcome. Approximately two-thirds of these patients were on maximally tolerated statin therapy. 78 Another large RCT that included approximately 19,000 patients 1–12 months after ACS studied alirocumab 75 mg SC every 2 weeks in addition to statins (90 % patients on intensive statin therapy) found a 15 % relative reduction in all-cause mortality throughout 2.8 years. 79 Both studies also found that lowering LDL-C is better without increased risk of adverse events. 80 1.3.3 Bempedoic acid Similar to statins bempedoic acid also reduces hepatic cholesterol synthesis and increases LDL receptor expression therefore clearing the LDL from the circulation. This is an oral prodrug that is activated in the liver only, not in skeletal muscles like statins so less likely to produce side effects related to the musculoskeletal system. It has shown a 17–28 % reduction in LDL levels by multiple studies and approved by FDA and European agencies. 81 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 In a recently published double-blind placebo-controlled RCT (CLEAR OUTCOMES)which included 13970 patients with a follow-up of ∼40 months. In this study, bempedoic acid decreased LDL levels by 21.1 percentage points at 6 months (Baseline LDL was 139 mg/dl, it decreased to 107 mg/dl with bempedoic acid compared to 136 mg/dl with placebo). Composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, or coronary revascularization as primary endpoint also reduced significantly. It also reduced the hs-CRP levels similar to statins. It included patients both for primary and secondary prevention. Increased incidences of cholelithiasis, gout, and elevated hepatic enzymes are more with this molecule compared to placebo. 86 1.3.4 Inclisiran A novel small interfering ribonucleic acid has been found to cause a significant reduction in low-density cholesterol by approximately 50 % with a twice-yearly injection. Additionally, it causes a decrease in apoprotein B and non-HDL-C by approximately 40–45 %. In a country like India, where 6 out of 10 Indians have, high LDL, inclisiran can be a valuable addition to the existing arsenal among lipid-lowering therapies. 87 One may argue that the cardiovascular outcomes for inclisiran are awaited with its ongoing trials of ORION 4 and VICTORION 2 PREVENT, but it is well-known that the benefit of lowering LDL-C appears to be independent of the mechanism by which LDL-C is lowered. 88 This has been established via erstwhile Mendelian randomization studies across 300000 participants and 80000 CHD cases. 89 Moreover, it is encouraging to see that the patient-level pooled analysis of ORION-9,-10, and −11 across 3655 patients over 18 months (which included analysis of the pre-specified exploratory endpoint of major cardiovascular events) has shown a significant reduction in composite MACE by 26 % showing the trend to be in the right direction. 90 It is also worth noting that the NICE guidelines as well as ACC expert consensus mention inclisiran as an attractive option for patients with ASCVD and HeFH who are not on goal or may have adherence challenges respectively. 91 92 1.3.5 Global guidelines for acute coronary syndrome management European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2019 guidelines recommend that irrespective of fasting status, the lipid profile of ACS patients should be obtained as early as possible after admission. This is because fasting has minimal effect on LDL levels, which decrease within a few days after the event ( Fig. 1 ). High-dose statins should be started within 1–4 days of the index event regardless of LDL-C levels. This will be beneficial in risk factor assessment and to understand the treatment strategy from the beginning. Pre-treatment with statin is recommended for patients who are planned for invasive treatment. LDL reduction goal is < 55 mg/dl or at least 50 % reduction from the baseline regardless of age or gender. Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels below 40 mg/dl should be considered in patients who experience another vascular event(s) within 2 years despite maximally tolerated statin therapy. Low- or moderate-dose statin therapy should be considered in those who are at increased risk e.g. elderly, hepatic or renal impairment and at risk of drug–drug interactions. 93 36 , 94 , 95 Lipid profile should be repeated after 4–6 weeks for determination of desired LDL-C target. PCSK9 inhibitors (evolocumab is available in India) may be considered early after ACS events in patients who failed to achieve the LDL-C target despite high-dose statin and ezetimibe. Fig. 1 Lipid management in the setting of acute coronary syndromes. Fig. 1 1.3.6 Specific guidance for lipid management in the indian ACS population Every ACS patient should get a non-fasting lipid profile as soon as possible after the event. The causality of LDL cholesterol with ACS and the benefit of its reduction has been proven beyond doubt across the globe. Maximum reduction in LDL cholesterol provides maximum benefit without any evidence of harm regardless of age or gender. This cardiovascular benefit is independent of the mechanism by which LDL cholesterol is reduced, therefore intensive lipid-lowering strategy should be the first approach instead of intensive statin therapy first.LDL reduction goal is < 55 mg/dl or at least 50 % reduction from the baseline which can be achieved with upfront combination therapy of high-dose statin and ezetimibe. Usually, there is a 50 % reduction in LDL-C after consumption of high-intensity statins therefore if the baseline LDL-C is above 110 mg then achieving LDL-C below 55 mg may not be possible with a high-intensity statin alone. Combination therapy is more effective, and safer and helps to reach the LDL-C target earlier thereby reducing the risk. According to recent clinical trial evidence, PCSK 9 inhibitors or bempedoic acid may be included in the LLT alongside statins and ezetimibe in ASCVD or familial hypercholesterolemia patients who fail to meet the LDL-C goal. When statins at any dose are not tolerated, dual therapy in the form of ezetimibe with either bempedoic acid or PCSK 9 inhibitors should be started. Rather than start with high-dose statin and wait and watch, it would be prudent to hit hard and hit fast. In the present guideline, extreme highrisk population includes 1) patient with recurrent events in the same territory or in different territories (peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease) within 2 years, 2) patient of ASCVD with diagnosis of Heterozygous Familial Hyperchoelterolemia and elevated Lp(a) above 50 mg. LDL-C target in these cases should be LDL-C below 40 mg/dL and non-HDL-C below 70 mg/dL. Please refer to 96 Fig. 1 in the executive summary. 2 Conclusion Despite major advances in drug therapy and revascularization strategies, every fifth person suffering from ACS dies within 5 years. An in-depth understanding and implementation of evidence-based lipid-lowering therapy is of paramount importance for improvement. Lipid levels should be obtained soon after ACS and upfront combination therapy including high-dose statin and ezetimibe preferred over statins alone within 1–4 days of the index event with a target LDL level of <55 mg/dl or >50 % reduction from the baseline. PCSK 9 inhibitors or bempedoic acid should be added if targets are not achieved within 4–6 weeks. Multiple large-scale RCTs of PCSK9 inhibitors have shown significant reduction in ischemic events with a lack of major adverse reactions with more pronounced effects in high-risk subset such as diabetes mellitus, high baseline LDL‐C level (>100 mg/dL), poly-vascular disease, chronic kidney disease, history of multiple coronary events. However, increased cost is the main hindrance to its widespread use. Bempedoic acid is effective in recently published large double-blind RCT and may be considered in patients not tolerating statins. Inclisiran use has shown promising results in large mandelian randomization studies. Continuous evolving therapies with better adherence to guideline-directed medication will improve the outcomes. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.