1 Introduction Coronary artery disease (CAD), myocardial infarction (MI), and sudden death in young adults (18–40 years of age) are common in India. Many of these are reported in individuals with apparently no history of preceding symptoms and risk factors. Studies have shown that childhood dyslipidemia is a strong predictor of ASCVD in adulthood. The measurement of lipids routinely in the general population at a young age would significantly contribute to detecting and treating lipid disorders before they precipitate a cardiac event. 1 1.1 Screening guidelines for dyslipidaemia among young adults 2 Due to the asymptomatic nature of dyslipidaemia, its identification before the development of signs or symptoms of cardiovascular disease (CVD) is of paramount importance. Screening may be of particular benefit in identifying young adults with markedly elevated lipid levels due to unrecognised FH. The ESC 2019 guidelines recommend that risk factor screening including the lipid profile should be considered in men >40 years old, and women >50 years of age or post-menopausal. 3 Considering the higher risk of ASCVD in Indians, and the presence of widespread dyslipidaemia in India, the Cardiological Society of India would like to recommend screening for all Indians beginning from 18 years of age, particularly if there is a family history of heart disease, diabetes, and hypertension. 4 1.2 Risk assessment and management If a patient is 20 or older and has LDL-C levels of 190 mg/dl or higher, to reduce LDL-C by at least 50 %, high-intensity statin therapy should be initiated right away. If LDL-C levels remain above 100 mg/dl despite maximally tolerated statin therapy, ezetimibe can be added. If the patient has a risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and his/her LDL-C level remains above 100 mg/d despite the addition of Ezetimibe to the statin, Bempedoic acid or a PCSK9 inhibitor or Inclisiran may be considered. Young adults with diabetes or hypertension with risk factors should receive low to moderate-intensity statin therapy to bring the LDL-C below 70 mg/dl. 1.3 Lifestyle changes and dietary therapy (refer to diet chapter) ACA/AHA 2018 and 2019 guidelines reiterate the importance of maintaining a lifestyle that is heart-healthy by all during their entire life. 5 Secondly, shared decision-making with the patient is essential and will likely help the patient understand the gravity of the situation which in turn would lead to the adoption of preventive strategies at the earliest. Young adults with dyslipidaemia are first treated with a diet reduced in total fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol. The intake of complex carbohydrates is increased, whereas that of simple sugars is decreased. No decrease in total protein is recommended. The use of plant stanol esters or plant sterol esters can reduce LDL-C an additional 10–15 % when added to a low-fat diet. Water-soluble fibres may also provide an additional 5–10 % lowering of LDL-C, while Soy protein lowers VLDL-C and TG, and increases HDL-C. Additionally, all individuals should be exhorted to routinely undertake physical activity for 30–45 min on most days of the week. Combined exercise (resistance training plus aerobic exercise) is best for improving TG and TC. 6 1.4 CSI recommendation of dyslipidemia in young adults 1. Secondary prevention Every young adult (18–40 years) with evidence of ASCVD should be on statin therapy with or without non statin drugs to achieve LDLc goal <55 mg. Young adults with ASCVD should be treated like any patient with a goal to reduce LDL-c <55 mg/dl with high dose statin or combination of statin and ezetimibe. If the target is not attained or it is not tolerated by the patient then Bempedoic acid should be initiated. If the targets are still not achieved then there is a role of PCSK9 inhibitors or Inclisiran. 2. When to screen Indian young adults (18–40 years age group), for dyslipidaemia? All individuals should have their lipid profile evaluated by the age of 18. At this age, the individual understands the significance of the measurement and is more likely to volunteer. They are also easy to capture because they are about to enter college or the workforce. Patients with suspected familial lipid disorders will need to be tested earlier. 3. How to address dyslipidaemia in young adults in the presence of risk factors like diabetes, hypertension, smoking, and obesity? In the presence of risk factors like diabetes, hypertension, smoking, and obesity dyslipidemia in young adults should be treated pharmacologically as appropriate, along with risk factor modification. Risk factor modification with education and lifestyle is an important component. It will include dietary changes, weight control, smoking/tobacco cessation, and regular exercise to reach the LDL goal. Adults younger than 40 years with high coronary artery calcium score are considered to be at an elevated risk of cardiovascular disease. Selective use of screening for coronary artery calcium might be considered in young adults with risk factors for primary prevention. 7 4. How to address dyslipidaemia in young adults without any presence of risk factors? We know that because Indians are predisposed to early diabetes and cardiovascular disease, maintaining low LDL levels even in the absence of risk factors contributes significantly to overall risk reduction. Low-density lipoprotein levels in these individuals should be reduced to 100 mg/dl through strict dietary recommendations, aggressive lifestyle modification, and if required, low-dose statin therapy (Atorvastatin 10 mg or Rosuvastatin 5 mg or Pitavastatin 1–2 mg. 5. What is the role of nutraceuticals ? Nutraceuticals are used by patients to help reduce lipids, and some data, though not event-driven, is available about their benefits, which may be used in conjunction with dietary and lifestyle changes. One may choose to combine the two, but keeping in mind that nutraceuticals can also have side effects. There has been growing evidence to support the effectiveness and safety of lipid lowering nutraceuticals such as red yeast rice, garlic, plant sterols, berberine etc. in patients with low cardiovascular risk but with abnormal lipid profile. Effectiveness and tolerability of nutraceuticals is supported by few randomised control trials but there are no outcome trials. In people who have no associated risk factors, no family history but have mild to moderate dyslipidaemia, nutraceuticals can be administered along with statin and/or non-statin lipid-lowering therapy. It can also be administered in patients who are intolerant to statins in combination with non-statin drugs with additive effects to reach the goal. 8 6. What should be the strategy for high triglycerides and normal LDL in young adults? Triglycerides (TG) above 150 mg/dl to 500 mg/dl are linked to an increased risk of CVD (because of remnant cholesterol) and should be reduced. Obesity should be aggressively treated, sugar levels should be improved, reduce high carbohydrate diet, exercise regimens should be encouraged and stop alcohol. Only when these measures fail to reduce triglycerides look for non HDL-C, if it is above 130 mg/dl we can start with small dose of statin. If TG remains high, then omega 3 fatty acids and/or IPE (Icosapent ethyl) should be initiated. If TGY>500 mg/dl in young adults we can use Fenofibrate and/or IPE. Saroglitazar may also be an option if patient is a diabetic or has evidence of NAFLD. 2 Conclusion Our country's decade-early onset of CV disease makes it imperative to detect lipid disorders early in life so that we can detect and prevent problems that may occur years later. The absence of symptoms associated with dyslipidaemia necessitates routine lipid testing early in life. This would allow for the early detection and treatment of familial hyperlipidaemia and other types of dyslipidaemia. Reducing the duration of elevated lipid years will have a significant impact on lowering the overall cardiovascular burden. Use of statins, ezetimibe, bempedoic acid, and PCSK9 inhibitors, as well as inclisiran in the future, will be essential in the management of very high lipid values in familial lipid abnormalities. The key to reducing the severe burden of cardiovascular disease in our young Indian population is the adaptation of aggressive guidelines through education and implementation. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.