1 Introduction Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in elderly individuals worldwide, especially the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD), myocardial infarction and stroke are increasing after 65 years in men and after 75 years in women. 1 , The elderly constitutes a special category of patients, where treatment continues to be a significant challenge due to the physiological changes induced by age, altered metabolism, a large number of comorbidities and related multi-drug treatment, risk of drug–drug interactions, as well as cognitive dysfunction often seen in this population. 2 1 , 3 Statins represent the main pillar in cardiovascular prevention, lowering serum cholesterol and reducing mortality and ischemic events, especially in high-risk patients across all age groups. Elderly patients have often been excluded from major clinical trials of statins, thereby limiting the experience with these drugs in advanced age. 1 2 Current evidence on statin use in the elderly 2.1 Statins and primary prevention in the elderly Clinical trial evidence supports the use of statin therapy for the primary prevention of nonfatal ASCVD events in elderly individuals 66–75 years of age, as this age group has been well represented in trials. In one meta-analysis by Savarese et al, the benefits of statin use in elderly people without established CV disease was assessed in terms of reduction in all-cause mortality and CV events. 4 The analysis included 8 trials enrolling 24,674 subjects (42.7 % females; mean age 73.0 ± 2.9 years; mean follow-up 3.5 ± 1.5 years) on statins. The study suggests that in elderly subjects at high CV risk without established CV disease, statins significantly reduce the incidence of MI and stroke, but do not significantly prolong survival in the short-term. Compared with placebo, statins significantly reduced the risk of MI by 39.4 % (relative risk [RR]: 0.606 [95 % confidence interval (CI): 0.434–0.847]; p = 0.003) and the risk of stroke by 23.8 % (RR: 0.762 [95 % CI: 0.626–0.926]; p = 0.006). In contrast, the risk of all-cause death (RR: 0.941 [95 % CI: 0.856–1.035]; p = 0.210) and of CV death (RR: 0.907 [95 % CI: 0.686–1.199]; p = 0.493) were not significantly reduced. Another meta-analysis of age-specific outcome data from two primary prevention statin trials, JUPITER (Justification for Use of Statins in Prevention: An Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin) and HOPE-3 5 (Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation) by Ridker et al combined new subgroup data revealed that in elderly individuals 65–70 years of age, rosuvastatin reduced the risk of a composite endpoint (nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or cardiovascular death) substantially by 49 % (RR: 0.51; 95 % CI: 0.38–0.69), and the risk was reduced by 26 % (RR: 0.74; 95 % CI: 0.61–0.91) in those ≥70 years of age. The efficacy was similar in individuals ≥70 and < 65 years of age, indicating little heterogeneity in treatment effect by age. 5 5 2.2 Secondary prevention in the elderly Secondary prevention after a stroke or MI with a statin, can diminish the risk of a recurrent CV event. Most studies on secondary prevention are elderly population who earlier had a related event. The Prospective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk (PROSPER) included 5804 patients, aged between 70 and 82 years old) more than half women), with a history of vascular disease or with a high risk to develop CVD, due to hypertension, smoking, and diabetes mellitus. In individuals treated with pravastatin (40 mg), the risk of CVD, including non-fatal MI, CV death, fatal, and nonfatal stroke, reduced by 15 % compared to placebo. Mortality from coronary disease fell by 24 % (p = 0.043) in the pravastatin group. This trial, used as part of the guidelines of 2016 European Society of Cardiology/European Atherosclerosis Society (ESC/EAS) was used to extend the statin treatment strategy to the elderly. 6 6 , 7 The SAGE trial—Study Assessing Goals in the Elderly—compared the therapy with atorvastatin 80 mg daily with pravastatin 40 mg daily. Patients treated with atorvastatin had lower all-cause mortality, but a non-significant decrease in major CV events. In the Heart Protection Study (HPS) which compared the treatment with simvastatin with placebo for 5 years, a reduction of 18 % in coronary death and 25 % in coronary events was seen. 8 The individuals were divided into three age categories—<65 years old, between 65 and 70 years old, and more than 70 years old—and there were no significant differences between the different categories. 9 Another cohort study included 23,000 patients with MI treated with statins. Of 23,013 patients with AMI assessed, 5,513 (24.0 %) were receiving a statin at discharge. Nearly 40 % of eligible patients (n = 8,452) were aged 80 and older, of whom 1,310 (15.5 %) were receiving a statin at discharge. In a multivariable model taking into account demographic, clinical, physician and hospital characteristics, and propensity score, discharge statin therapy was associated with significantly lower 3-year mortality (hazard ratio (HR) = 0.89 (95 % confidence interval (CI) = 0.83–0.96)). In an analysis stratified by age, discharge statins were associated with lower mortality in patients younger than 80 (HR = 0.84, 95 % CI = 0.76–0.92) but not in those aged 80 and older (HR = 0.97, 95 % CI = 0.87–1.09). 10 2.3 Meta-analysis of statin and non statin use in the elderly –recent evidence in overall prevention This meta-analysis involving 21,492 older patients from statin and non-statin trials of lipid-lowering treatments adds new evidence regarding the efficacy and safety of lowering LDL cholesterol in older patients (Among 244 090 patients from 29 trials, 21,492 (8·8 %) were aged at least 75 years, of whom 11 750 (54.7 %) were from statin trials, 6209 (28.9 %) from ezetimibe trials, and 3533 (16.4 %) from PCSK9 inhibitor trials.) This study found an unequivocal reduction in the risk of major vascular events with both statin and non-statin LDL cholesterol-lowering treatments, which was like that seen in younger patients. Moreover, significant reductions were seen for all of the individual components of the composite endpoint, including CV death, MI, stroke, and coronary revascularisation. 11 This study published in the Lancet, in 2020, concludes, that these results should strengthen guideline recommendations for the use of lipid-lowering treatments, in older patients, including statins. 2.4 The dilemma of statin prescriptions in the elderly There is a concern that older, frail individuals may be at increased risk of statin related adverse effects. Deprescribing of statins significantly increases with age and increased frailty level. This is also because frailer individuals may have a limited life expectancy and it is unclear whether they will derive benefit from statin therapy for primary prevention. The same may also be true for older adults with end-stage renal disease, end-stage heart failure, advanced dementia, or metastatic cancer. Prescribing a statin in these individuals, therefore requires re-consideration. However a recent cohort study from Denmark among 83,598 adults has revealed some interesting results, where it has been found that with low-to moderate-intensity statins, in patients aged 75 years or older had greater mean LDL-C percentage reductions than younger patients which might be more appealing in older adults who are at increased risk for adverse events. 2 12 2.5 Other agents for cardiovascular disease in the elderly 2.5.1 Ezetimibe Ezetimibe is often used in addition to statin therapy for better control of LDL-C levels. The Improved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial (IMPROVE-IT) evaluated the effect of ezetimibe and simvastatin combination in 18,144 stable patients who had an ACS, where a clear benefit was shown in prespecified subgroup analysis with a HR: 0.80 (95 % CI: 0.70, 0.90) in the 2,798 patients age over 75 years. The study clearly revealed that in elderly patients who are at high cardiovascular risk, further addition of ezetimibe was beneficial. Another study with Ezetimibe known as Lipid-Lowering Trial on Prevention of Atherosclerosis in 75 or Older (EWTOPIA 75) study, which included adults aged ≥75 years across 363 centres in Japan, demonstrated marked reductions in the primary composite outcome (sudden cardiac death, MI, coronary revascularisation, or stroke) over a median follow up of 4.1 years. 13 14 2.5.2 EPA In a recent study OMEMI trial (Omega-3 Fatty acids in Elderly with Myocardial Infarction), elderly patients with a recent AMI who received 1.8 g of n-3 PUFA did not have a lower incidence of MACE or death than those randomised to placebo after 2 years of follow-up. Although remarkable results have been shown from REDUCE-IT trial which demonstrated a 25 % reduction in cardiovascular events with 4 g/day of icosapent ethyl in statin-treated patients with hypertriglyceridemia and established cardiovascular disease or diabetes, which has given new light to the field of treatment with EPA. 15 16 2.6 Bempedoic acid Bempedoic acid could represent a valid novel therapeutical option in elderly patients, since the CLEAR study included statin-intolerant patients aged 18–85 years with a history of cardiovascular disease or at high cardiovascular risk, where treatment with bempedoic acid was associated with a lower risk of MACE. Although the current European and American guidelines has not mentioned regarding its positioning in lipid lowering therapies. In a meta-regression analysis, the lipid-lowering effect of bempedoic acid was found to be more pronounced with older age and moreover the increase in uric acid levels were significantly associated with age. 17 Another recent meta-analysis over 11 RCTs comprising of 18,496 patients has concluded that although bempedoic acid effectively reduces the risk of cardiovascular events and myalgia but it was also found to increase the risk of gout, cholelithiasis, and renal impairment which might be a challenging in elderly populations. 18 Both the authorities EMA and FDA has given a label warning for bempedoic acid regarding the risk of tendon rupture (involving the rotator cuff, biceps tendon, or Achilles tendon) and hyperuricemia/gout especially in patients aged >60 years. 19 2.7 PCSK9 inhibitors In FOURIER trial, patients were also eligible for participation up to the age of 85 years, where it demonstrated that treatment with evolocumab significantly reduced the composite primary endpoint of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, stroke, hospitalization for unstable angina, or coronary revascularization across all age quartiles (<56, 56 < age ≤63, 63 < age ≤69, age >69 years). Moreover, absolute risk reduction with evolocumab was also found to be the same across all the age ranges analysed. 20 Study has shown that the LDL-C lowering efficacy of alirocumab does not seem to depend on age with patients age over 75 years having similar efficacy compared to younger patients. 21 , In the prespecified analysis of ODYSSEY OUTCOMES with alicorumab, 5.3 % of the patients included were aged ≥75 years, and 0.2 % (n = 42) were aged ≥85 years. Alirocumab reduced the risk of the primary composite endpoint (MACE) across the age categories; similarly, preserved clinical benefit in LDL-C reduction was observed in both the dichotomised age ranges (<65 and ≥ 65 years) analysed. Alirocumab was associated with a greater absolute risk reduction for the primary endpoint and a decreasing number needed to treat for patients aged >65 years compared with patients aged <65 years. 22 2.7.1 Inclisiran Also siRNA-based therapy Inclisiran has a label that patients aged ≥65 years, no dose adjustment is recommended. Over half of the patients who were included in ORION 10 (patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease) and ORION 11 (patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or risk equivalent) belonged to this older age group. A pooled analysis of 3660 patients from the ORION trials focused on different age groups and included 39.1 % patients aged ≥65 to <75 years and 13.4 % patients aged ≥75 years. 19 , Moreover, the LDL-C-lowering effect (approximately − 50 %) did not differ across age groups. Also the estimated glomerular filtration rate had to be > 30 ml/min in ORION 9, ORION 10, and ORION 11, because there is no daily dosing with Inclisiran, and the mechanism of action is not directly linked to plasma exposure, no dose adjustment is recommended in renal disease. 20 2.8 Dyslipidemia in stroke patients . 3 Introduction Dyslipidaemia is an important risk factor for not only CAD but also ischemic stroke. Additionally, the CV risk increases after a stroke. 25 , Cholesterol is an established risk factor for ischaemic stroke. 26 Hence, LDL-C lowering therapies, such as statins (preferably), ezetimibe, or proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors are used to prevent the occurrence or recurrence of stroke. Guidelines generally advocate the “lower is better” approach. 27 However, target goals for lipids are likely to need adjustment according to the type of stroke and any other comorbidities as studies have shown that total cholesterol (TC) is inversely linked to risk of intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH). 28 29 3.1 Role of statins LDL-C is the most useful serum lipid marker for predicting the risk of stroke, and over the last decade, statins have emerged as the predominant preventive strategy to tackle the worldwide stroke burden. Currently, statins are considered the most important advance in stroke prevention since the introduction of aspirin and antihypertensive treatments. Statins are now recommended for the primary prevention of ischaemic stroke in patients estimated to have a high 10-year risk for cardiovascular events. 30 31 A meta-analysis of randomised trials of statins has shown that each 1 mmol/l (39 mg/dl) decrease in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, equates to a reduction in relative risk for stroke of 21.1 %. 31 In patients with acute ischaemic stroke, it has been observed that the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage or CVD is lower with the use of statins despite early or high-intensity statin administration. In EUREKA study the effect and safety of rosuvastatin was investigated in acute stroke patients within 48 h after symptom onset and it was concluded that statins reduced haemorrhagic transformation. In another recent Treat-Stroke to Target (TST) trial, it was demonstrated that targeting LDL-C < 70 mg/dl after ischemic stroke with intensive lipid lowering resulted in lower risk for more CV events. 32 33 In another meta-analysis of eighteen randomized controlled trials by Wang et al revealed that statins reduced the overall incidence of stroke than placebo (odds ratio [OR]: 0.80; 95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.74–0.87; P < 0.00001). In particular, statins showed efficacy in reducing the incidence of fatal stroke (OR: 0.90; 95 % CI: 0.67–1.21; P = 0.47) and haemorrhagic stroke (OR: 0.87; 95 % CI: 0.60–1.25; P = 0.45). 34 A total of 15 studies with 710,504 participants included in a dose response meta-analysis showed that the pooled RR of total stroke for the categories with the highest compared with the lowest adherence to statins was 0.72 (95 % CI 0.65–0.79). Stratified by stroke subtype, the pooled RR for ischemic stroke (IS) was 0.83 (95 % CI 0.74–0.92) and for haemorrhagic stroke was 0.75 (95 % CI 0.51–1.09). The dose–response analysis indicated that an improvement in statin adherence of 20 % was associated with an 8 % lower risk of total stroke (RR 0.92; 95 % CI 0.89–0.94). In the subgroup analysis for IS, an improvement in statin adherence of 20 % was associated with a 7 % lower risk of IS (RR 0.93; 95 % CI 0.88–0.99). 35 Improved adherence to statins was thus associated with a lower risk of stroke, particularly of IS. Overall data appears to suggest that a statin-based lipid-lowering is effective both for primary and secondary prevention of stroke. Most benefit derives from targeting disease-free individuals at high CV risk, and by achieving low treatment targets for low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol in stroke survivors. Though the research based evidence for statin administration in transient ischaemic attack patients is lacking, SPARCL trial demonstrated 20 % decrease in overall stroke risk among 80 mg atrovastatin group. 36 In patients with small-vessel occlusion stroke who have a history of ICH or micro bleeds, long term high intensity statin therapy should be administered with caution taking into account the effectiveness and side effects. 3.2 Other agents for stroke 3.2.1 Ezetimibe In the Improved reduction of Outcomes:Vytorin efficacy International trial (IMPROVE – IT) administering Ezetimibe despite statin therapy in ACs patients, lowered CVD risk by 6 %, overall stroke risk by 14 % and ischemic stroke risk by 21 % without increasing the risk of ICH. 37 High intensity statin therapy is recommended for stroke; however stroke recurrence or ASCVD is not rare even if LDL-C goal is attained. It is suggested to consider ezetimibe-statin combination therapy in stroke patients if LDL-C goal is not achieved and/or in statin intolerant patients. 3.2.2 PCSK9 inhibitors PCSK9 inhibitors have been proved to be safe and effective in ASCVD patients. FOURIER trial proved that Evolocumab lowered LDL-C by 59 %. 42 % of Evolocumab-administered patients achieved LDL-C of 25 mg/dl. Compared with the placebo group; Evolocumab treatment group had 20 % decrease in CVD risk, 21 % decrease in overall stroke risk and 25 % decrease in ischaemic stroke risk. Furthermore, adverse effects and neurological side effects were not significantly different among treatment groups . 20 Alirocumab, another PCSK9 inhibitor was compared with placebo group in Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcomes After an Acute Coronary Syndrome During. Treatment With Alirocumab (ODYSSEY OUTCOMES) trial and it showed that LDL-C reduced 55 % from baseline, risk of ischaemic stroke decreased by 27 % without any hemorrhagic stroke risk. Furthermore, there is clinical evidence to show that PCSK9 inhibitors do not increase the risk of incident diabetes thus drug adherence was better. 21 Thus in cases of statin intolerance and where LDL-C goal is not achieved in spite of maximum intensity, PCSK9 inhibitors can be safely administered for a stroke patient. 3.2.3 Bempedoic acid Although in CLEAR study, Bempedoic acid treatment in patients aged 18–85 years was associated with a lower risk of MACE but there was no significant effects on fatal or nonfatal stroke, death from cardiovascular causes, and death from any cause. In a recent meta-analysis which included three RCTs with a total of 16,978 patients, it was revealed that the use of bempedoic acid was associated with a significant reduction in MACE. In that study the individual analyses showed a low risk of MI, coronary revascularization, and hospitalization due to unstable angina but without any effect on stroke. 17 Thus, in future more number of studies are much awaited to validate its optimal benefit in patients with outcomes of stroke. 38 3.2.4 Inclisiran ORION-9 (patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia [HeFH]), ORION-10 (patients with ASCVD), and ORION-11 (patients with ASCVD or ASCVD risk equivalent), comprised a total of 3660 patients showed reduction of MACE after twice-yearly subcutaneous dosing of inclisiran but no effect on cardiovascular mortality. 23 , 24 , 39 3.2.5 Triglyceride-lowering agents Based on findings from REDUCE-IT trial Icosapent-ethyl can be considered as an adjunct therapy to statins for hypertriglyceridemia but further research is required in stroke patients. Icosapent ethyl significantly reduced the risk of stroke in patients taking statins. But the rate of peripheral oedema and atrial fibrillation was higher in Icosapent ethyl group. 16 3.3 Dosing consideration in elderly patients Atorvastatin 10-80 mg once daily, At recommended doses efficacy and tolerability in patients >70 years comparable to total population. Lovastatin 20-80 mg once daily, Efficacy in patients >60 years comparable to total population; no obvious increase of adverse events. Pitavastatin 2-4 mg once daily, No dose adaptation recommended. Pravastatin 10-40 mg once daily, No dose adaptation unless other risk factors are present. Rosuvastatin Starting dose of 5 mg for patients >70 years then may go up to 20 mg. Simvastatin 10-80 mg once daily, No dose adaptation recommended. Ezetimibe 10 mg one daily, No dose adaptation recommended. Bempedoic Acid 180 mg once daily, No dose adaptation recommended EPA 2 -4 gm a day, No dose adaptation required Alirocumab 75 mg SC q2Weeks or 300 mg SC q4Weeks, No dose adaptation required Evolocumab 140 mg SC q2weeks OR 420 mg SC once monthly, No dose adaptation required Inclisiran 284 mg SC x 1 dose initially, repeat in 3 months and then every 6 months thereafter, No dose adaptation required. 4 Conclusion A patient-centred, individualised approach should be taken for lipid management in older patients. Statin therapy should not be refused only on the basis of age, moreover statin usage as primary prevention for the elderly is vastly supported by meta-analysis. In the elderly populations, statins have been found to reduce mortality and risk of CVD & always advised to keep goal <55 mg for secondary prevention. In elderly patients, statins should be started at a low dose with a careful monitoring for adverse effects and should be titrated upwards as tolerated by patient to achieve LDL goals, although deprescribing of statins significantly increases with age & increased frailty level. There is inadequate evidence for the treatment of dyslipidaemia primary prevention in patients over 80–85 years of age and clinical judgement based on patient considerations should guide decisions in this population. Elderly patients who are at high CV risk, further addition of ezetimibe is likely to be beneficial. Although Bempedoic acid is another emerging option but one should be cautious about the warnings of hyperuricemia and tendon rupture keeping in mind the frailty of the patient. Dyslipidaemia is also an important risk factor for not only CAD but also ischemic stroke. A statin-based lipid lowering strategy is effective both for primary and secondary prevention of stroke. Achieving low treatment targets for LDL cholesterol (<55 mg/dl) in stroke survivors leads to a lower risk for additional CV events. In patients with small-vessel occlusion stroke, who have a history of ICH or micro bleeds, long term high intensity statin therapy should be administered with caution taking into account the effectiveness and side effects, such as increased risk of ICH. If LDL-C goal is not achieved and/or in statin intolerant patients, ezetimibe-statin combination therapy in stroke patients may be considered. PCSK9 inhibitors like Evolocumab also decreases CVD risk as well as overall stroke risk, especially ischemic stroke risk. While, icosapent ethyl in combination with statins reduces the risk of stroke. However more number of studies is warranted for establishing the beneficial effects of bempedoic acid in preventing stroke. Still, important questions remain about lipid-lowering therapy in older patients in general and, in particular, about the future role of the newer lipid-lowering agents, not least in the context of primary prevention. It should also be pointed out that drug–drug interactions with statins could be avoided or minimised by choosing the appropriate substance according to its pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties. From a practical perspective, the advanced lipid lowering treatments like PCSK9 inhibitors like evolocumab, alirocumab, and inclisiran may be advantageous for use in older patients due to its less frequent dosing, the lack of drug–drug interactions with the CYP system or drug transporters especially in patients with polypharmacy or certain comedications although cost constraint issues exists with such advanced drugs. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.