Introduction Prediabetes, a marker of diabetes risk defined as having an A1C ranging between 5.7% - 6.4%, is disproportionately prevalent among Hispanic men compared to non-Hispanic White men. Weight loss and weight-reducing lifestyle changes, including caloric restriction and physical activity, can reduce diabetes risk and are recommended in the form of intensive lifestyle interventions, as the primary prevention strategy for those with prediabetes. 1 – 3 However, despite the growing incidence of diabetes among Hispanic men, they remain underrepresented in existing lifestyle interventions. 4 , 5 A recent systematic review of facilitators and barriers to lifestyle change among adults with prediabetes reported only one study focused on Hispanic adults, of which men were a minority (n=6). 6 , 7 8 Prior research suggests Hispanic men believe there are benefits to maintaining a healthy weight, but that they have unique perspectives and preferences related to their gender and culture. For example, in referencing physical activity as part of weight management, Hispanic men have cited preferences for group-facilitated aerobic exercise programs that include team sports or Latin music, and have cited unique barriers to healthy eating and physical activity, such as inflexible work hours, work-induced fatigue, and the absence of language-concordant resources and outreach. 9 , 10 Regarding dietary preferences, studies indicate that culturally-associated foods often shared in social settings are perceived to promote overeating and contain high-fat content. 9 – 13 More broadly, gender-associated roles may also influence beliefs around weight management: self-perceptions of being the primary provider within a family was cited as a motivator for Hispanic men to manage their weight. 9 – 11 While these studies have explored perceptions of weight management among Hispanic men, they have often recruited those men from community sites and excluded men with increased risk for diabetes or with diagnosed prediabetes. Few studies have focused on Hispanic men in the United States at diagnosed with prediabetes, and those that have had several limitations, excluding non-English speakers, not recruiting from clinical settings where prediabetes is most likely to be diagnosed and managed, and not using established frameworks to identify how beliefs regarding prediabetes influence intentions to engage in preventative behaviors and lifestyle interventions. To date, the perceptions of weight management among Hispanic men diagnosed with prediabetes remain unexplored, limiting the capacity to adequately modify interventions specifically for diabetes prevention. 10 Recognized for their mission to serve medically underserved populations regardless of socioeconomic and health insurance status, Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) provide primary care to approximately 11 million Hispanic patients nationally. In 2022, about 2.9 million patients at health centers were diagnosed with diabetes, with Hispanic patients aged 18 – 74 reflecting 1.08 million of those patients. 14 – 16 Because FQHCs seek to adapt their services to surrounding community needs, they are ideal settings to explore Hispanic men’s beliefs and preferences regarding diabetes prevention. 17 , 18 Previous literature has investigated the involvement of FQHCs in preventative efforts such as screening and management of chronic diseases. 14 However, their potential role in preventing diabetes among Hispanic men remains understudied. 15 , 19 , 20 To address this gap, this qualitative study samples Hispanic men from an FQHC and uses an established theoretical framework, the Health Belief Model, to explore their experiences being diagnosed with prediabetes and the perceived influences on engaging in preventative behaviors and lifestyle change. Findings can inform the development of interventions to engage Hispanic men in diabetes prevention. Methods Setting and Recruitment Recruitment for this qualitative study occurred March - November 2023 at an FQHC serving a predominantly Hispanic population in East Harlem, New York. The FQHC has been located at this site for over 20 years and provides resources beyond clinical care, including immigration and legal services, to the surrounding community. The primary investigator (PI; CJG) is a clinician at the FQHC. The study recruited patients who: (1) self-identified as a Hispanic man, (2) were at least 18 years old, and (3) had an HbA1c of 5.7%−6.4% within the past year. Exclusion criteria included (1) a diagnosis of diabetes, (2) preferred language other than English or Spanish, and (3) inability to complete a phone interview. Convenience sampling was used given the exploratory nature of the study. Potential participants were invited to the study during routine interactions or scheduled outreach, and those interested were referred to the study team. Individuals who confirmed interest in participating underwent informed consent. Participants were provided a $50 gift card. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Weill Cornell Medicine and the FQHC. Out of twenty-six referred patients screened for the study, fifteen provided consent and completed individual interviews. Five patients declined due to a general lack of interest or not identifying as having prediabetes; the remaining six patients could not be reached to schedule interviews. Data Collection A trained qualitative interviewer conducted 30-minute interviews over Microsoft Teams, recorded through built-in recording systems. Given the lack of literature focusing on this specific population, in-depth interviews were used to explore how personal experiences influenced individual-level weight-related behaviors. The interviewer (CPM) was a research assistant self-identifying as a bilingual Hispanic man, and the interview was performed in the participant’s preferred language (English or Spanish). The interviewer had no previous connections to participants, and only the participant and the interviewer were present during the interview to respect patient confidentiality and privacy. To increase the rigor of this theoretically informed qualitative study, the interviewer used a semi-structured interview guide based on the Health Belief Model. The Health Belief Model was selected because it is an established and well-accepted conceptual model that has been used to understand public and patient engagement in specific health behaviors. The model is also comprehensive, exploring six primary constructs: (1) perceived susceptibility to disease, (2) perceived severity of a disease, (3) perceived benefits of performing health behaviors, (4) perceived barriers to performing health behaviors, (5) cues to action, and (6) self-efficacy. Based on these constructs, the interview guide explored: (1) understanding and perceived risks of diabetes and obesity, (2) perceived benefits of engaging in behaviors aimed to prevent diabetes, (3) barriers and challenges to effectively engage with a program and adhere to preventative behaviors, and (4) potentially helpful resources to facilitate diabetes prevention. Interviews aimed to identify how Hispanic male roles potentially influenced these perceptions. The interview guide ( 21 , 22 Supplementary File 1 ) explored these constructs over four sections of open-ended questions, and used a brief 11-question multiple choice survey to collect sociodemographic data. Interviews were not repeated. Audio recordings were deidentified and professionally transcribed and translated into English language transcripts by a qualified external language service provider Ubiqus and stored in an encrypted password-protected server. Bilingual members of the research team confirmed the validity of translations. Transcripts were not returned to participants for comments or corrections. There were no field notes made during interviews. Analysis Transcripts were imported into NVivo and independently coded by two researchers trained in qualitative coding (NH, CPM). Considering the availability of an established behavior change theory, coding primarily used a deductive thematic approach, with new codes categorized into the major constructs of the Health Belief Model. The lead investigator (CJG), a male Hispanic clinician practicing within the FQHC and with experience in qualitative research, supervised and reconciled the coding of an initial transcript, labeling and consolidating data into an initial codebook. The codebook was used to code subsequent transcripts, adding new codes as they emerged. New codes were reviewed and reconciled by the lead investigator, who aided in their categorization. Ultimately, 83 codes emerged, presented in Supplementary File 2 . Similar codes were categorized into subthemes, and final themes were determined through consensus of the study team. Consistent with other qualitative studies, recruitment continued until saturation, the point at which no new codes emerged, was reached, at 15 participants. Participants did not review or provide feedback on findings. 23 Results We interviewed 15 self-identified Hispanic men with prediabetes (mean duration: 35.44 minutes), over half of whom were younger than 50 years (60%). Two-thirds of participants preferred Spanish (66.7%), and one-third did not complete high school (33.3%). Additional details about the study sample are presented in Table 1 . Reflecting the major constructs of the Health Belief Model, 5 major themes and 15 subthemes emerged. These are presented in detail below and summarized with illustrative quotes in Table 2 . Theme 1. Perceived Susceptibility and Severity of Diabetes: Despite fearing diabetes, Hispanic men are unsure about their personal risk for developing it. Diabetes is a life-changing disease Participants expressed fear towards the lifestyle implications and consequences they believe are inherent to a diabetes diagnosis. One of the major consequences of the disease participants described was the commitment to lifelong treatment, which they considered to be “a very awful life” and a “kind of hell” for someone to “be living on medication” and “all the time have to be pricking [their] fingers.” Participants also described more extreme diabetes-related fears, including pain, suffering, and even death. Sugar consumption is common and dangerous While participants did not have a clear understanding of the many different factors that contributed to their diabetes risk, many acknowledged that “consuming foods [with] high sugar content” was an obvious risk. Participants discussed how prevalent sugar was in their meals, “most of what we eat in the street are processed, and high in sugar,” and reflected on the frequency of their sugar intake leading up to their prediabetes diagnosis: “I know during that time I was eating a little too much sugar.” Family history and cultural staples confer some risks Several participants noted a family history of diabetes and recognized the potential for the disease to be “hereditary,” causing them to “always be on guard” out of fear of facing similar consequences as their loved ones: “my father died of diabetes at a young age.” Some participants also considered their ethnicity as contributing to their risk: “Hispanic, Latino, I think we are number one in developing diabetes.” Prediabetes is unclear, undermentioned, and unexpected Participants described having little knowledge about prediabetes before their diagnosis, stating they “never even knew there was something called prediabetes,” and they “really don’t understand” what it means for their health. Some participants expressed feeling caught off guard by their diagnosis: “I was aware of diabetes, but like everyone else, you have the notion that that’s not going to happen to me.” Theme 2. Cues to Action: Receiving a clinical diagnosis and recognizing its potential impact on family members heightens concerns about diabetes risk. Clinical visits are triggers to act When reflecting on the clinical visit during which they received their diagnosis, participants described developing a sense of urgency related to their health and reducing their risk of diabetes. Many participants described that prior to being told they had prediabetes, they had “heard of prediabetes mentioned in conversation” but “never paid attention to what that meant until [they] went to the doctor.” One participant stated that when his doctor gave him the “news [he] got a little worried,” a sentiment shared by other participants. Prediabetes threatens a man’s role in his family Some participants explained that their loved ones actively encouraged them to engage in preventative behaviors: “my boys would say, Dad, you can’t eat that. What are you doing?” Others expressed fear of not being able to provide for their family, or of burdening them with the loss of a father, due to diabetes. Notably, when asked explicitly, men did not feel their gender played a role in their diagnosis or interactions with preventative behaviors. Theme 3. Perceived Benefits of Lifestyle Change: Small, practical changes in dieting and exercising can make preventing diabetes manageable. Incorporating exercise into daily activities is easier to implement and maintain When discussing exercise habits, participants expressed a lack of time to commit to formal exercise routines, opting instead to incorporate moments of physical activity into their daily living. Participants described switching to walking during their daily commutes and trying to make it a habit to “go outside to walk.” These participants found it was “hard to do exercise” in a more traditional way but were able to motivate themselves to move when it fit into their routine. Smaller portions and balanced meals are healthier Participants recognized that certain foods contributed to their diabetes risk, but rather than completely eliminating these foods, they found it easier, and thus more effective, to maintain diet changes that focused on portion control and variety. Participants described efforts to consume less carbohydrates, especially rice, and “alternating” between different carbohydrate sources instead of consuming them all at once (e.g. rice with pasta). Additionally, participants mentioned incorporating fruits and vegetables in their meals to make them more balanced. Recreational sports are approachable ways to exercise Participants shared that certain forms of exercises were less intimidating and more fulfilling than others. Some described preferring swimming in community pools as it “was very therapeutic,” while others described choosing to go for a walk or run in local parks, attending local gyms, or biking in the neighborhood as their mode of exercise. Some participants also mentioned group-facilitated exercises like Tai Chi and sports like volleyball as their preferred forms of exercise. Theme 4. Barriers to Lifestyle Change: Restrictive environments and schedules, coupled with some cultural habits, can lead to unhealthy lifestyle choices. Work schedules and fatigue restrict time, energy, and food access Participants often mentioned that their work schedule inhibited the time and energy necessary they had to exercise or cook healthy meals. Many participants described a daily schedule focusing only on work and coming home to sleep and recover for their next workday, which they found reduced their motivation and energy. Participants also expressed that they preferred to spend what little free time was available to rest, watching television or sleeping. During lunch breaks or time off work, many described opting convenient food options, like such as “whatever was offered to them” at work or whatever was the quickest to obtain. Unhealthy food is readily available and tempting Participants described “junk food” and “fast food” to be the most accessible and highly desired option. They described these foods as “leaving [them] more satisfied” than healthier options, which made it particularly challenging to resist cravings. Participants also found these options to be easier, as they required few resources or time: “we can’t make the time of day to cook the meals, the right meals.” Limiting some cultural staples is challenging Participants expressed that cultural foods were the hardest to avoid. They described being accustomed to certain foods, having been exposed to them since childhood. They also described being frequently presented certain staples, often by family members at events. Participants recognized that several commonly used ingredients, such as rice, lard, and sweets, could contribute to their risk of developing diabetes, however, they also considered these items as inherent parts of “Hispanic food.” Theme 5. Self-Efficacy: Lifestyle change is a matter of personal agency, but additional information can support the right changes. Behavior change depends only on the affected person Participants described that the decision to engage in preventative behaviors, including exercising and eating healthier, solely depended on themselves. They expressed needing to “initiate [these changes] on their own because no one else will do it,” explaining that their diagnosis was their own responsibility: “It’s me who has the prediabetes.” As one participant noted: “If you don’t take care of yourself, then who will?” A strong will is necessary for behavior change Participants often felt that “willpower” was a crucial component to committing and maintaining lifestyle changes. Despite describing several challenges to healthy eating and physical activity, they noted that avoiding unhealthy temptations and finding time for regular exercise were “sacrifices you have to make” and behaviors “you have to stick to.” Accessible information is needed and desired Participants expressed wanting information about their health and the preventative behaviors they can take part in. Specifically, they wanted clearer nutritional guidelines, including what foods to incorporate into their diets and what foods to avoid. Many requested that the information be in written form, like a pamphlet, so they could take it home. Participants also expressed wanting support from their doctors or outreach programs to receive additional information as needed. Discussion In this qualitative study of Hispanic men diagnosed with prediabetes, participants expressed fear of developing diabetes yet substantial uncertainty regarding their prediabetes diagnosis and its implications. They explained that manageable lifestyle changes were likely effective at preventing diabetes, and they disclosed powerful triggers, such as clinical visits and recognizing diabetes’ potential impact, that encouraged making those changes, but admitted that work and unhealthy food environments were considerable barriers. Nonetheless, Hispanic men felt diabetes prevention was possible if they were sufficiently determined to make the necessary changes and if they were given more specific dietary and physical activity recommendations that could facilitate making the right changes. Our results are consistent with prior findings that awareness and understanding of prediabetes are generally severely limited. In one nationally representative sample, only 11.8% of individuals meeting the defined criteria for prediabetes were aware of their diagnosis. Similarly, qualitative assessments have revealed pervasive knowledge gaps about prediabetes and its management, especially about adequate preventative behaviors. 24 These findings suggest the persistent need to better inform patients with prediabetes about the meaning and implications of the diagnosis, and particularly for the need to provide Hispanic men with tailored information regarding diabetes risk factors. 25 However, our study reveals several perceptions related to diabetes prevention that may be unique to Hispanic men in historically under-resourced settings: (1) Participants referred to unhealthy food environments and unpredictable, often overwhelming, working conditions that affected the capacity to engage in preventative behaviors. These findings likely reflect the socioeconomic demographics of the study sample and of FQHCs overall. FQHCs provide care to over a quarter of the U.S. population living below the federal poverty line. This has important implications, given the association of poverty with diabetes risk and incidence. 26 (2) Hispanic men in our study referred to specific cultural staples, primarily rice and fried foods, and recognized their possible contribution to diabetes risk, their ubiquitousness, and the challenge of limiting them to prevent diabetes. This is consistent with prior findings reflecting perceived cultural influences on the diet of Hispanic men. 27 (3) Although Hispanic men did not explicitly relate gender to diabetes risk, if was implied that their culturally-mediated social roles affected their attitude to addressing diabetes in two ways: the perceived responsibility to take care of their family members and the equation of sickness with weakness. This echoes findings of Hawkins et al., in which Hispanic men diagnosed with diabetes endorsed that efforts to uphold gender-associated roles, including the perceived responsibility of providing for family members, took precedence over seeking medical attention and also conflicted perceptions that sickness equated with weakness. 9 , 10 Despite sampling individuals from a single institution, our results are reasonably transferable to other FQHC settings, and they highlight how gender- and culture-related perspectives emerge in beliefs about prediabetes among Hispanic men at an FQHC, and how those beliefs in turn influence engagement in diabetes prevention. Future studies may aim to quantify these findings to provide insight into the prevalence of specific barriers to diabetes prevention among patients with prediabetes in FQHC settings, particularly in Hispanic men, and about potential strategies to address those barriers. Our findings suggest it may be particularly promising for FQHCs to provide lifestyle change recommendations that focus on promoting incremental changes that are acceptable to Hispanic men, and to ensure that those recommendations are feasible by considering how lifestyles changes could be sustained in restrictive environments. 28 Notably, Hispanic men in our study endorsed that clinical interactions played a vital role in reacting to being diagnosed with prediabetes, and also expressed wanting more specific information about how to prevent diabetes. Prior research suggests healthcare providers screen for diabetes, but only a few offer detailed recommendations for diabetes prevention, and even fewer refer eligible patients to lifestyle change interventions, as is guideline recommended. Although this issue is pervasive, real-world data suggests Hispanic men may be uniquely under-referred to such interventions. An assessment of real-world dissemination of the Diabetes Prevention Program, a widely established lifestyle intervention in the U.S., showed that only 8.6% of those who attended the initial session of the program identified as Hispanic and that Hispanic men composed less than 2% of all participants. 29 , 30 Future research should consider how healthcare providers can be supported in facilitating the recruitment of Hispanic men into lifestyle interventions that effectively reduce diabetes risk. This may include equipping healthcare providers with the skills necessary to communicate the diagnosis of prediabetes to Hispanic men, and implementing protocols and policies that overcome structural barriers hindering the referral of Hispanic men to such interventions. 31 – 33 Consistent with our research methodology and analytic approach, emerging themes predominantly aligned with the major constructs of the Health Belief Model ( Figure 1 ). Similar to the original model, participants’ beliefs regarding their perceived susceptibility to and severity of diabetes emerged as a single construct. In contrast, participants’ views of preventive behaviors, perceived benefits, and barriers to those behaviors emerged as two separate themes. Notably, when participants discussed the perceived benefits of preventative behaviors, they often focused on the specific behaviors they felt could be beneficial, and thus, the theme primarily reflects this sentiment. The interview guide structure could be responsible for that, but it may also reflect the need to evaluate individuals’ specific beliefs and preferences when given guidance regarding preventative behaviors. 22 , 34 Limitations This qualitative study used a rigorous theory-informed qualitative approach to explore the perspectives of a population disproportionately at risk of developing diabetes yet underrepresented in preventative efforts. Nonetheless, there are several limitations. The sociodemographic characteristics of the study sample may not adequately reflect those seen broadly within FQHCs. Although the sample generally reflects the diversity of the FQHC in relation to Hispanic origin, the study did not intend to capture the heterogeneity of the Hispanic population, nor was a comparative analysis performed to explore this heterogeneity. Notably, information related to Hispanic origin did not emerge in our interviews. The interview guide was informed by the Health Belief Model, and it may not have captured constructs not included in that model. Relatedly, the interview guide did not explore organizational barriers inherent to the FQHC, but instead only focused on sampling individuals in that setting. Some participants spoke with a nutritionist before or after interviewing, adding to the variability. Finally, the analysis leveraged a rigorous triangulation approach, with each transcript coded independently by two researchers and discrepancies resolved through consensus, but quantitative process measures were not analyzed. Conclusions Despite the effectiveness of lifestyle interventions in reducing diabetes risk, engaging Hispanic men in weight management efforts remains a challenge. Understanding the unique beliefs and preferences of Hispanic men is crucial for addressing barriers that hinder engagement in preventative behaviors. Our findings from interviews among Hispanic men with prediabetes at an FQHC provide valuable insights into their uncertainty regarding being diagnosed with prediabetes. They also reveal how work schedules and unhealthy food environments challenge participation in preventative behaviors, while clinical visits and specific dietary and physical activity recommendations could facilitate it. There remains a need for more research regarding how to mobilize materials and support systems to address the needs of Hispanic men with prediabetes. Supplementary Material