Background CVD such as stroke and heart disease are a public health imperative in SSA [ 1 ]. In recent years, there has been a significant shift in trend from infectious to non-communicable diseases in SSA, with CVD becoming a leading cause of mortality and morbidity [ 2 ]. The key drivers of the growing CVD burden in SSA are changing lifestyles, including sedentary habits and increased consumption of alcohol, tobacco, and foods high in saturated fat, salt, and sugar, which are primarily attributed to increased urbanization, the westernization of local diets, and socioeconomic development [ 1 , 2 ]. SSA is still grappling with high rates of communicable diseases, and hence, curbing the increasing burden of CVD is imperative. There is a global call to reduce the prevalence and impact of CVD. However, multifaceted challenges, including limited infrastructure, shortages of skilled professionals, limited public awareness, poverty, unhealthy lifestyles, and various barriers that hinder the adoption of preventive cardiovascular interventions, have hampered the SSA response to this crucial role in reducing the mortality and morbidity of the risk of developing CVD on a global scale [ 1 ]. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends the adoption of healthy habits such as regular physical activity, eating a nutritious diet, maintaining a healthy weight or weight loss, reducing alcohol consumption, avoiding tobacco, and routine blood pressure, blood glucose, and cholesterol checks to ensure early detection and management of risk factors for the prevention of CVD [ 3 – 5 ]. The adoption of healthy lifestyles for CVD prevention presents a great avenue to mitigate the impact of CVD in SSA. To ensure the large-scale adoption and maintenance of healthy lifestyles, it is crucial to identify the perceived barriers that hinder the adoption of these measures as well as the facilitators that can promote their uptake. Such knowledge would enable the development and implementation of comprehensive strategies that extend beyond individual-level interventions and address the broader socioecological factors influencing health behaviours for the prevention of CVD. This review aimed to critically appraise and synthesize available evidence on the barriers and facilitators to the adoption of healthy lifestyles for CVD prevention using the socioecological model while simultaneously proposing effective, equitable, and sustainable strategies to address the barriers and strengthen the facilitators. Specifically, we sought to explore the current barriers to the adoption of preventive cardiovascular interventions in SSA, understand the factors that enable the adoption of these interventions, and identify and showcase effective strategies to tackle these barriers and reinforce facilitators. Methodology This systematic review is reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) framework [ 6 ]. Defining the research question The PICO (Patient, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome(s)) framework was used to frame the research question for this review [ 7 ]. The population was people without a CVD or those who have already been diagnosed with a CVD and are based in an SSA country. Intervention/exposure was preventive cardiovascular interventions aiming to prevent CVD, such as cessation of tobacco use, reduction of salt in the diet, eating more fruit and vegetables, regular physical activity, and avoiding harmful use of alcohol . Outcomes were barriers and facilitators to the adoption of healthy lifestyles at intrapersonal, interpersonal, organizational, and community levels. Study designs This systematic review included both qualitative and quantitative studies. The included studies were either retrospective or prospective observational studies with or without a comparator group. We did not include randomized controlled trials because there were none. Inclusion and exclusion criteria We included qualitative (semi-structured, focus group discussions or open-ended interviews) and quantitative studies that explored or described barriers and/or facilitators to the adoption of at least one of the preventive measures (cessation of tobacco use, reduction of salt in the diet, eating more fruit and vegetables, regular physical activity and avoiding harmful use of alcohol), conducted in an SSA country between 2000 and 2024. A country was considered an SSA country if it lay south of the Sahara, including Central Africa, East Africa, Southern Africa, and West Africa. The study population could include adolescents (10–19 years), adults (18–65 years), and/or older people (>65 years). We excluded studies that did not meet the inclusion criteria as described above from this systematic review. Additionally, we excluded reviews, editorials, book chapters, master’s and doctoral theses, authors’ replies, and commentaries. We excluded these because they are not always peer-reviewed, which can impact their reliability and validity. Also, they may be influenced by biases or limitations that are not fully acknowledged or addressed. Search strategy and selection criteria A comprehensive search of relevant literature was conducted in PubMed, African Journals Online, and Google Scholar. Additionally, grey literature, including literature reviews, reports, and policy documents from organizations such as the World Health Organization and the African Union, was searched. We also examined the reference lists of systematic reviews for potentially relevant studies. The period from January 2000 to March 2024 was selected because the adoption of healthy lifestyles in SSA has gradually declined during this period [ 1 , 8 ]. Therefore, studies conducted during this period are more likely to identify the barriers and facilitators to adopting healthy lifestyles. Moreover, most of the currently available evidence has been generated within this period. Furthermore, the extensive period was chosen to account for disruptions caused by COVID-19 during the 2019–2021 period, which led to fewer studies being conducted during this period. Additionally, only papers published in English were included. The following keywords were used in each database: “cardiovascular interventions”, “prevention”, “barriers”, “uptake”, “SSA”, “smoking cessation”, “salt reduction”, “diet or nutrition”, “physical exercise”, “weight loss”, “alcohol”, “healthy lifestyles”. Using Boolean operators allowed for the combination of multiple keywords and their variations to ensure a comprehensive search. Study screening and data extraction Study records were screened independently by both authors based on predetermined inclusion and exclusion criteria and the primary outcomes. We removed duplicates, screened study abstracts and full texts to identify eligible studies, and performed the data extraction. Data extraction was done using a standardized form. We used Covidence, a web-based platform for systematic review screening and data extraction [ 9 ]. The following data were extracted from the studies: study characteristics (author, year, study design), participant characteristics (age, sex), aims, preventive cardiovascular measures (cessation of tobacco use, reduction of salt in the diet, eating more fruit and vegetables, regular physical activity, and avoiding harmful use of alcohol), and findings (barriers and/or facilitators). Quality assessment To ensure that only studies with high-quality evidence were included and to minimize potential biases in the included studies, the Critical Appraisal Skills Program (CASP) checklist for qualitative studies [ 10 ] was used to assess the quality of the qualitative studies, while the AXIS checklist [ 11 ] was used to assess the quality of cross-sectional studies. The CASP checklists consist of ten items with three possible responses to each item: “yes”, “no”, or “can’t tell.” An item was assigned a score of 1 if the response was “Yes”, 0.5 if the response was “can’t tell,” and zero if it was “No”. The maximum score was 10, and the minimum was 0 for the CASP checklist, while the maximum and minimum scores were 20 and 0, respectively, for the AXIS checklist. Studies that scored at least five on the CASP checklist for qualitative studies and at least 10 for quantitative studies were deemed of sufficient quality and were included in the review. Additionally, the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach was used to assess the certainty of the evidence for each outcome [ 12 ] bias. Both authors conducted the quality assessment. Data analysis For qualitative studies, a codebook was created using inductive coding informed by the themes extracted from the studies. The quantitative studies provided numerical data, and so the numerical data had to be converted to qualitative data to gain more insights on the underlying reasons, motivations, and contexts. For quantitative studies, data were converted to qualitative using the following steps: Identifying key or recurring themes that were relevant to the research question. Data transformation: We converted numerical data from quantitative studies into qualitative data. Narrative synthesis was then used to describe the transformed data qualitatively. Thematic analysis to identify and analyze patterns within the data. The themes from studies were classified into four broad categories based on the socio-ecological model as follows: Intrapersonal Interpersonal Organizational or institutional Community Results Figure 1 shows the PRISMA flow chart for the screening process. A total of 396 studies were identified, and 62 duplicates were removed. Titles and abstracts were reviewed for 334 studies, and 271 studies were excluded due to ineligibility. Sixty studies were identified for full-text review. After the full-text review using the eligibility criteria, a final sample of 25 studies was retained and included in the review. Fig. 1 PRISMA flow chart for the screening process Included studies Table 1 presents the characteristics of the included studies. Seven studies focused exclusively on physical activity or exercise [ 17 , 22 , 25 , 28 , 35 , 37 , 38 ], two studies exclusively on diet [ 20 , 27 ], even studies on both diet and physical exercise [ 13 – 15 , 18 , 24 , 30 , 31 , 34 ], one study looked at smoking cessation or tobacco reduction [ 32 ], two studies focused on adherence to medications for the prevention of CVD [ 16 , 19 ]. In contrast, one study focused on blood pressure management [ 26 ] and another on preventive healthcare services for CVD prevention [ 29 ]. Weight management or weight loss was the focus in two studies [ 14 , 33 ]. In comparison, two studies focused on the reduction of harmful alcohol use, smoking cessation, diet, and physical activity [ 2 , 21 ]. Table 1 Characteristics of included studies Study Participants Aim Study design Preventive intervention Setting Key themes CASP AXIS score Negera et al. (2020) [ 13 ] Ethiopia n = 322 type 2 diabetic patients mean age: (±SD) 44.2 (±1.3) To determine the prevalence and predictors of non-adherence to diet and physical activity among T2D patients Cross-sectional Diet and physical activity Urban Barriers: lack of time, healthy diets are expensive, sex, age, residence, low level of education, monthly income, smoking status, family/social support, duration of diabetes, absence of doctor’s instruction or advice regarding diet 15 Tshililo et al. (2016) [ 14 ] South Africa n = 30 adolescent girls, 15–17 years To investigate factors influencing weight control practices among adolescent girls Qualitative study with focus group discussion Weight management Rural Barriers: Insufficient knowledge about nutrition Facilitators: Body image dissatisfaction, being overweight and obese, parental criticism, parental dieting, parental encouragement on diet, weight-related teasing, peer pressure 6 Yiga et al. (2020) [ 15 ] Uganda n = 81, women 18–34 years To explore determinants of dietary and physical activity behaviours among women of reproductive age Qualitative study with focus group discussions Diet and physical activity Urban Barriers: gaps in food skills, knowledge and self-efficacy, food safety concerns, convenience, finances, physiological satisfaction, social-cultural norms, social networks, increased availability of unhealthy foods , limited space, sedentary entertainment like social media, and cheap transportation) 8.5 Woode et al . (2022) [ 16 ] Ghana n = 242 Hypertensive patients To evaluate the predictors of medication non-adherence among hypertensive clients in a Ghanaian population Cross-sectional study Medication adherence, smoking and alcohol cessation, diet, and physical exercise Urban Barriers: perceived non-effectiveness of medication, knowledge of medications, side effects of medications, lack of motivation, time constraints, easy access to cigarettes, lack of motivation, financial constraints, limited access to healthy foods 6.5 Odukoya et al . (2023) [ 17 ] Nigeria n = 163 Church members To explore the facilitators and barriers towards physical activity among adult church members Qualitative study with focus group discussions Physical activity Urban Barriers: Laziness and lack of interest, fear of injury and discomfort, poor mental health, preexisting health condition, delayed gratification, lack of space for physical activity, lack of knowledge of the importance of physical activity, high costs of gym memberships, and gender norms, adequate space, city living, high traffic density, and insecurity Facilitators: Availability of safe spaces, Biblical verses promoting spiritual physical activities and discourage laziness, certain cultural practices, family support, presence of young children in the home, the desire not to become a liability to one’s children and family habits, Self-discipline, personal habits, self-awareness and improved appearance 6 Sedibe et al . (2014) [ 18 ] South Africa n = 22 adolescent girls 16–19 years To explore perception, attitudes, barriers, and facilitators related to healthy eating and physical activity among adolescent girls Semi-structured interview qualitative study Diet and physical activity Rural Barriers: believes and personal attitudes, influences from traditional beliefs within their households and the community, limited choices or lack of food, household poverty, affordability and accessibility of healthier food, peer influence, aspirations to purchase more socially desirable, convenient fast foods, school discouraged them from participating in extra- mural activities Facilitators: taste and the feeling of health experienced after eating a particular fruit or vegetable, proximity of gardens enabled healthy eating, influence of the female caregivers, health education messages in clinics, magazines, and church youth gatherings, local schools with government- supported meal programs provided cooked meals 6 Odusola et al. (2014) [ 19 ] Nigeria n = 40 insured hypertensive patients To explore perceptions of inhibitors and facilitators for adhering to hypertension treatment among insured patients Qualitative semi-structured interviews Adherence to medications rural Barriers: Adherence to medications: distance to the clinic, inflexible clinic schedule, long waiting time, shortage of essential drugs, patients’ perception and knowledge of risk factor, adverse effects, side effects, complexity of prescription regimes, polypills, multiple dosing regimen, medication use discouraged by faith practice, poor social support, Facilitators: affordability of care, reputation and approachability of healthcare provider, peer support, trust in orthodox medicines, availability of prescribed pills, perception of severity of illness or its consequences, family support 8 Hushie (2019) [ 20 ] Ghana n = 33 Type 2 diabetic patients To explore the barriers and facilitators of T2D self-care as perceived by patients and health providers (HPs) Qualitative study with in-depth interviews Diet Urban Barriers: counselling process and context, unacceptance of diagnosis, reluctance to change, dislike and confusion about recommended diets, social functions interfering with dietary regimens, family members diverting patient from dietary goals, long waiting times, low patient involvement in decision-making, unrealistic goals, and dietary recommendations, tastelessness of recommended diet, lack of family support, limited education on social aspects) Facilitators: Quality of patient-provider relationship, family support, Patient education, acceptance of diagnosis, self-motivation 7.5 Ndejjo et al. (2022) [ 21 ] Uganda n = 31 20–40 years To explore the factors influencing uptake of healthy lifestyle practices among adults following the implementation of a community CVD prevention program Qualitative study with in-depth interviews Diet, physical activity, alcohol cessation, smoking cessation, stress management Rural Facilitators: awareness and knowledge of CVD, motivation to change, anticipated benefits of change, perception of CVD risk, perception of financial cost of maintaining behaviour, social pressure to change) Barriers: limited knowledge and skills, comorbid health conditions, limited finances, time constraints, limited access to and varieties of healthy foods, reluctance to change, easy access to unhealthy meals, and lack of physical activity facilities. COVID-19 restrictions, weather, easy access to tobacco, culture-related factors, lack of role models or peers to inspire others 9.5 Amin et al . (2023) [ 22 , 23 ] Ghana n = 13 Healthcare professionals To explore the opinions of healthcare professionals regarding barriers and facilitators to physical activity participation among Ghanaian adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus Qualitative semi-structured interview study Physical activity Urban Barriers: Time constraints to promote physical activity during patient consultation, inadequate access to exercise therapists, lack of clear-cut guidelines for patients, lack of evidence-based knowledge physical activity guidelines, low prioritiation compared to medication and diet in diabetes and the perception that physical activity is not a treatment option for diabetes Facilitators: presence of physical therapists and diabetes educators, inclusion of physical activity in healthcare education, availability of structured exercise resource , nurses and doctors’ competences and addressing knowledge gaps and misconceptions on physical activity 8 Doegah and Acquah (2022) [ 24 ] Ghana n = 16 nurse trainees 18–25 years To examine the perceived practice, enablers, and barriers in adopting healthy dietary and physical activity behaviours Qualitative study with in-depth interviews Diet and physical activity urban Barriers: include upbringing, preference, accessibility, safety/appearance, as well as studies/lectures, busy lifestyle, inadequate feeding, studies/academic activity, student societies, upbringing, and social support Facilitators: self-discipline, dietary knowledge, social support, access/availability, body image, social support, and the existence of student societies 9.5 Idowu et al . (2015) [ 25 ] Nigeria n = 121 stroke survivors To identify perceived barriers to physical activity among stroke survivors in Nigeria Cross-sectional study Physical activity Urban Barriers: access to exercise facilities, inflexible exercise schedules, time constraints, lack of encouragement from spouse, and lack of family support 15 Gebrezgi et al . (2017) [ 26 ] Eritrea n = 48 hypertensive patients To identify barriers and facilitators to hypertension management from the patient’s perspective Qualitative study with in-depth interviews and focus group discussions Blood pressure management Urban Barriers: Misconceptions about physical activity, financial constraints, community awareness, stigma, access to health facilities, patient-provider relationship, and use of traditional medicine Facilitators: patients’ knowledge, family involvement or support, social interactions, approachability of healthcare provider, government support 9 Trübswasser et al . (2021) [ 27 ] Ethiopia n = 26 adolescents 16–19 years To assess factors influencing dietary behaviours of adolescents in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia Qualitative study with in-depth interviews and focus group discussions Diet Urban Barriers: Knowledge of nutrition and food safety, taste of foods, socio-economic status, family influence, peer influence, food availability, and affordability Facilitators: Food culture, food hygiene and sanitation, food packaging, source of food 7 Noukpo et al. (2023) [ 28 ] Benin n = 87 stroke survivors To document the physical activity level and understand the barriers and facilitators to engaging in physical activity for community-dwelling stroke survivors Cross-sectional study Physical activity Urban Barriers: Lack of information, complexity of exercise, long distance to exercise spaces/facilities, concern about safety, cost Facilitators: Self-motivation, family support and supervision, use of enablers, health status, perceived benefits 17 Douglas et al . (2021) [ 29 ] South Africa n = 20 primary health care managers To investigate facilitators and barriers at the level of primary health care facilities, for the prevention of CVD Exploratory and descriptive qualitative with open-ended key informants Preventive health services Rural and semi-urban Barriers: Poor infrastructural development, shortage of medical supplies and equipment, lack of health promotion activities, shortage of nurses and other health care personnel, and poor accessibility to primary health care services Facilitators: availability of policies and guidelines; health education program; collaboration with schools, traditional and religious leaders; the use of modern technology; and a structured healthcare system 8.5 Agyemang et al . (2022) [ 30 ] Ghana n = 3348 adults To determine which factors influence diet and physical activity, jointly and separately, among adults aged 18 years or more Cross-sectional study Diet and physical activity Urban Barriers: Religion, culture, income, employment, being single, culture, poor health status, misconception about being overweight , Facilitators: Culture, perception of risks associated with obesity, higher income 18 Wrottesley et al . (2021) [ 31 ] South Africa n = 75 adolescents and their caregivers To understand facilitators and barriers to healthy eating practices and physical activity in younger and older urban adolescent South African boys and girls, and to understand how the views of caregivers interact with, and influence, teenage behaviours Qualitative study with semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions Diet and physical activity Urban Barriers: Lack of self-motivation, lack of autonomy, influence of caregivers, accessibility and affordability, weather/environment, media or technology, laziness Facilitators: Public health promotion/campaigns, family influence, peer influence, personal motivation, church/work, media, perceived benefits on health and appearance 8 Vilane et al. (2022) [ 32 ] Kenya, Ethiopia, Senegal, and Tanzania n = 1801 adult smokers To examine the smoking cessation behaviour (previous quit attempts and intention to quit) among adult smokers in four African Countries Cross-sectional survey Smoking cessation Not specified Barriers: Low level of education, unemployment, and poverty Facilitators: Wealth index, employment, higher level of education, tobacco cessation advice , being young, urban dwelling, spousal support/influence 17 Afrifa-Anane et al . (2022) [ 33 ] Ghana n = 44 adults To explore perceived factors that hinder or facilitate weight management in an urban poor context Qualitative study with focus group discussions Obesity/weight management Urban Barriers: Cost, poverty, lack of knowledge on benefits, negative perceptions, taste and satiety, adverse effects (diarrhoea for fruits and vegetables) , community influence , lack of time, laziness, stress, and side effects , Facilitators: Self-motivation, perceived benefits, media influence, social support) 7 Janha et al . (2021) [ 34 ] The Gambia n = 60 adolescents and caregivers To explore, from the perspectives of adolescents and caregivers, influences on adolescent diet and physical activity Qualitative study with focus group discussions Diet and physical activity Rural Barriers: affordability, seasonality, the receipt of remittances, gender norms, mother-led decision-making, cultural ceremonies, and school holidays , gender, seasonality, cultural ceremonies, and the availability of digital media 7.5 Walter and Du Randt (2011) [ 35 ] South Africa n = 41 adults and young professional women To investigate barriers to physical activity participation in two generations of black professional women Qualitative study with in-depth interviews Physical activity Urban Barriers: lack of social support, exercise, “not being a part of African culture”, traditional gender roles, dress code, misconceptions (exercise associated with the young, exercise associated with undesirable weight loss), community influence 7 Mensah et al . (2022) [ 36 ] Ghana n = 255 adults aged 18–75 years To explore perceptions of community members on contextual factors driving CVD (CVD) behavioural risk (alcohol consumption, smoking, physical in)activity, and fruits and vegetables consumption Qualitative study with focus group discussions Alcohol consumption, Smoking, Diet, and physical activity Mixed Barriers: stressors, lack of self-confidence, economic challenges such as loss of job, unemployment, and poverty, health challenges (boost their sexual performance), socio-cultural factors, environmental influence, social events (Bob Marley Day) , peer pressure, pleasure, health reasons, stressors, perceived benefits on health, economic factors, easy access, affordability, time constraints, personal dislike, pride, and laziness, medical conditions, age, getting tired easily, competing priorities, life’s challenges, variety of fruits available, and lack of knowledge Facilitators: perceived risk of smoking, perceived benefit on health, and availability 7.5 Banda et al. (2023) [ 37 ] Malawi n = 32 prediabetic adults To compare and contrast accounts of practices and attitudes towards physical activity among Malawian men and women (previously identified as having pre-diabetes) in urban and rural settings Qualitative study with focus group discussion Physical activity Mixed Barriers: competing priorities, societal expectations around wealth, use of motorized transport, lack of accessible facilities for women, ageing, and ill health 6 Oluwasanu et al . (2021) [ 38 ] Nigeria n = 59 school principals and teachers To explore the qualitative views of school principals and teachers on the barriers and opportunities for promoting the physical activity behaviours of adolescents within the school settings in light of the socio-ecological model Qualitative study with focus group discussions and key informant interviews Physical activity Urban Barriers: declining number of trained physical health education teachers, limited opportunities for continuing education, low prioritization of physical health education, increasing demand for classroom academic time, negative attitudinal dispositions of other teachers, inadequate funding for schools, security threats 8 Study designs Six studies were cross-sectional studies [ 13 , 16 , 25 , 28 , 30 , 32 ]. Nineteen [ 17 ] studies used a qualitative method, with eight studies using focus group discussions [ 14 , 15 , 17 , 33 , 34 , 36 – 38 ], while semi-structured interviews were used in three studies [ 18 , 19 , 23 ], in-depth interviews in four studies [ 20 , 21 , 24 , 29 , 35 ], and focus group discussions with in-depth interviews in three studies [ 26 , 27 , 31 ]. Study populations The study population varied greatly among the studies included in the review. Five studies focused on adolescents [ 14 , 18 , 27 , 31 , 34 ]. Most studies were conducted among people at risk of CVD (primary prevention), while two studies focused on those who had already developed CVD (secondary prevention) [ 25 , 28 ]. Settings Most studies ( n = 16) were conducted in an urban setting [ 13 , 15 – 17 , 20 , 23 , 24 , 26 – 28 , 30 , 31 , 33 , 35 , 38 ], a rural setting ( n = 5) [ 14 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 34 ], and a mixed setting ( n = 3) [ 29 , 36 , 37 ]. One study did not specify the setting [ 32 ]. Most studies ( n = 6) were conducted in Ghana [ 16 , 20 , 23 , 30 , 33 , 36 ], five in South Africa [ 2 , 14 , 18 , 29 , 31 ], two in Ethiopia [ 13 , 27 ], one in The Gambia [ 34 ], Benin [ 28 ], Malawi [ 37 ], Eritrea [ 26 ], and four in Nigeria [ 17 , 25 , 38 ]. One study was conducted in multiple countries (Kenya, Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Senegal) [ 32 ]. Eighty-four percent of studies ( n = 21) included both males and females, while 16% ( n = 4) focused only on females [ 14 , 15 , 18 , 35 ]. Excluded studies Eighteen studies were excluded because their outcomes were not relevant to the research question. For example, some studies examined challenges to implementing preventive measures for CVD, while others reported on opportunities and/or gaps in CVD prevention without assessing barriers or facilitators. Eight studies were excluded due to the wrong patient population, as some were conducted on specific populations, such as those with HIV/AIDS. In contrast, others were conducted in populations outside the SSA. Other studies were excluded for wrong study design [ 6 ], commentaries [ 2 ], and wrong intervention [ 1 ]. Quality of included studies Table 1 summarizes the different quality scores for all the studies included. The 19 qualitative studies included were of moderate to high quality, with CASP scores ranging between 6 and 9.5. The lowest-scoring domains were reflection on positionality and the sampling method. Most studies did not reflect on the positionality of the researcher with respect to the research. Also, the purposive sampling method was the most commonly used method to recruit participants. For the six quantitative studies, the AXIS quality scores range between 15 and 18, with the lowest-scoring domain being justification of sample size. Emerging themes Several themes emerged at the individual, interpersonal, environmental, and interventional levels. Recurring barriers across different health behaviours include lack of time (especially for engaging in physical activity), access issues (variety of healthy food choices, spaces or facilities for physical exercise), financial costs (healthy food choices were more expensive), personal attitudes (low perception of the benefit of a healthy behaviour), and behaviours (lack of motivation, self-discipline), sociocultural norms restrictions, poverty, family influence, and lack of knowledge or awareness [ 13 , 14 , 16 – 21 ]. Poverty or socioeconomic status was the most commonly cited barrier among participants across many studies [ 13 , 15 – 18 , 21 ]. For all studies, having a positive attitude towards an action was a facilitator, whereas having a negative attitude was a barrier. Intrapersonal level themes were perception of risk/benefit, attitudes, level of knowledge, socioeconomic status, time constraint, self-motivation. At the interpersonal level, social support or influence was the main emerging theme [ 13 – 15 , 18 – 20 , 24 – 26 , 28 ]. Emerging themes at the community level were cultural and social norms, and socioeconomic characteristics of the community [ 15 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 25 ]. Lastly, at the organizational/institutional level, healthcare provider attitudes and knowledge, and availability and accessibility of preventive services were the main emerging themes [ 13 , 19 , 20 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 29 ]. Certainty of evidence The certainty of the evidence for each outcome was moderate. Overall, the included studies were well-designed, and the reported results were consistent. We found no serious concerns regarding the directness or precision of the evidence, nor was there a potential for publication bias. However, the small sample sizes and purposive sampling methods used by most studies may have introduced some uncertainty into the evidence. Primary findings For most studies, facilitators and barriers were inversely related across the four levels. For example, at the interpersonal level, the presence of self-motivation was a facilitator, while the lack of self-motivation was reported as a barrier. The following sections will give more details on the themes across the different levels. Intrapersonal level At the intrapersonal level, participants identified limited health literacy, financial constraints, perceptions, a lack of motivation, self-efficacy, and self-discipline, as well as attitudes that were the major barriers. Economic or financial constraints were a common barrier to access to affordable, healthy food options and opportunities for physical activity for many participants. This made it challenging for people with low incomes to translate intentions into sustained healthy behaviours [ 15 , 16 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 26 , 27 , 33 , 34 , 36 ]. Healthy food choices were often perceived as more expensive and less accessible [ 28 ]. Conversely, unhealthy food choices were perceived as inexpensive and readily available [ 18 , 36 ]. In many studies, competing priority demands, such as the education of children and housing, were cited as significant obstacles to adopting healthy behaviours, including healthy diets. Many of the participants said they prioritize providing for their families and meeting daily needs over paying for nutritious meals or healthy food choices. Participants with limited health literacy, who either did not fully understand the long-term benefits of maintaining healthy behaviours or held specific beliefs, prioritized other concerns or needs over preventing CVD [ 13 – 15 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 24 , 28 , 31 – 33 ]. For example, in one of the studies, participants’ awareness of the benefits of weight loss or healthy weight, such as reduced risk of diabetes, hypertension, and high cholesterol, motivated them to lose weight [ 33 ]. Additionally, a negative perception or sense of low self-efficacy (believing that one cannot successfully implement lifestyle changes) [ 15 , 33 , 39 ], competing priorities (e.g., prioritizing children’s education over paying for healthy foods), lack of time [ 13 , 18 , 25 , 33 , 36 , 38 ], and pre-existing health conditions (e.g., bone or joint problems, asthma, and epilepsy) increased the likelihood of non-adherence to healthy lifestyle interventions [ 17 , 30 ]. A lack of motivation and self-discipline to maintain a healthy lifestyle was also highlighted as a barrier to sustained lifestyle changes, particularly in physical activity [ 17 , 18 , 21 , 24 , 28 , 31 , 33 ]. Participants reported difficulties sticking to their physical activity routine due to a lack of motivation and/or self-discipline. This was sometimes attributed to the lack of immediate health benefits from lifestyle changes. In one study, participants believed that a healthy lifestyle helps prevent CVD from occurring in the future and hence did not see the need to engage in it now [ 30 ]. Participants’ concern for “side effects” of certain interventions, e.g., fear of injury and discomfort at the start of a new exercise regimen, diarrhoea after consuming fruits and vegetables [ 17 , 33 ], negatively influenced participants’ attitudes and likelihood of adhering to a healthy lifestyle change. On the other hand, participants’ concern for the negative consequences of not adopting a healthy lifestyle, such as developing a chronic disease and/or dying from it, having a poor body image, and experiencing low self-esteem due to being overweight, prompted behavioural changes [ 24 , 33 ]. Concerning diet-related interventions, desire for satiety and variety [ 18 , 27 , 36 ], food taste (e.g., participants liked the taste of fried and sweet foods [ 27 ], and available food choices [ 18 , 36 ]) negatively impacted participants’ ability to adhere to healthy foods. Experiencing or seeing the physical benefits of a healthy behaviour encouraged participants to continue maintaining healthy behaviours. Particularly in lower socioeconomic groups, people perceive healthy behaviours as a luxury rather than a necessity [ 21 ]. Believing that healthy lifestyles are primarily for those with a high socioeconomic status negatively affected the motivation to adopt such behaviours. In some of the studies, participants admitted to not feeling at risk or believing that they would develop heart disease, even in the face of known risk factors [ 21 , 33 ]. This perceived invulnerability prompted participants to deprioritize the adoption of healthy lifestyles. Interpersonal level At the interpersonal level, family and social support, peer pressure, and family practices played a significant role in shaping lifestyle choices. Having adequate social support from family and peers facilitated the adoption and maintenance of healthy behaviours, as participants were more likely to be encouraged and held accountable by their social networks [ 13 , 15 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 24 – 26 , 28 , 32 , 33 ]. Parental criticism and/or encouragement (e.g., on dieting and weight loss) motivated the younger participants to adopt healthy behaviours [ 14 , 15 ]. Conversely, the absence of social support or the presence of negative social influences hindered personal efforts to adopt healthy lifestyles [ 25 , 35 ]. Family practices regarding diet were either a barrier or a facilitator. For example, for many of the participants, especially the adolescents, the mother was responsible for food preparation, and if she was not informed about or motivated to prepare healthy meals, it was challenging for the family to adopt a healthy diet [ 14 , 17 , 18 , 27 , 31 ]. Having a positive role model (e.g., a parent who maintains a healthy lifestyle) also arose as a key influence, especially among younger participants. Younger participants who were living with their parents mentioned that their food culture (preparation and choices) was adopted from the mothers, while religious and women group leaders were identified as positive role models for a healthy diet [ 14 , 15 ]. In contrast, the absence of positive role models or the presence of negative role models was a barrier to adopting a healthy lifestyle [ 21 ]. Organizational/institutional level The lack of accessible and affordable healthcare services, limited public health infrastructure and resources, healthcare provider characteristics, and the quality of provider-patient relationships were significant barriers to the adoption of healthy lifestyles. In some studies, participants reported difficulties in accessing essential healthcare services such as medications for blood pressure or diabetes control, physical exercise therapists, and dieticians due to the unavailability of these services in their local communities—particularly in remote or underserved areas—along with long wait times and high service costs [ 19 , 29 , 38 ]. These often prevented individuals from receiving routine screenings, essential medicines, education, and support for adopting and maintaining healthy behaviours. Approachability, patient-provider relationship, trust, and reputation of healthcare providers were also important factors, as some participants reported being hesitant to engage with the healthcare system due to past negative experiences or cultural barriers [ 19 , 20 , 26 ]. Participants were more likely to adhere to behavioural changes if they could easily approach their healthcare providers and present any issues related to the lifestyle changes [ 19 , 20 ]. Shorter distances to healthcare institutions, flexibility in clinic schedules, shorter waiting times, encouragement or support from healthcare providers, and high-quality health education or counselling were facilitators for adhering to preventive interventions, such as adherence to medications for the treatment of cardiovascular risk factors like diabetes and hypertension [ 19 , 20 ]. The quality of counselling received from healthcare providers significantly influenced participants’ motivation and ability to initiate and maintain healthy behaviours [ 19 ]. Conversely, long distances to clinics, longer waiting times, and the complexity of preventive interventions (e.g., polypill, multiple-dosing regimen, complex exercises) were barriers to adherence [ 19 , 20 , 28 ]. Low patient involvement in decision-making and unrealistic goal setting were identified as barriers [ 19 , 20 ]. In one study [ 28 ], the use of enablers or incentives was a significant facilitator. One study reported the use of modern technology, such as mHealth, as a facilitator [ 29 ]. Other institutional-level barriers included limited time to promote healthy lifestyle choices during patient consultations, inadequate access to exercise therapists, a lack of clear-cut guidelines for patients, a lack of evidence-based knowledge (e.g., by healthcare providers), and a low prioritization of education on healthy lifestyles (e.g., healthcare providers prioritize counselling patients on medication adherence over educating them on adopting healthy lifestyles) [ 19 , 20 , 22 , 24 , 29 , 38 ]. On the other hand, where the healthcare provider had the right skills and knowledge (e.g., addressing knowledge gaps and misconceptions on lifestyle changes), and specialists (e.g., diabetic educators) were present, adherence was facilitated [ 19 , 22 ]. Community level The physical, social, and economic characteristics of the community or environments in which participants live either facilitated or hindered the adoption of healthy lifestyles. The availability and accessibility of healthy food options, along with the presence of safe spaces for physical activity, were significant determinants for the participants' adoption of healthy lifestyles [ 16 , 17 , 25 , 29 , 37 ]. Communities where access to affordable, nutritious foods or opportunities for engaging in physical activities was limited discouraged the local inhabitants from engaging in and adopting and maintaining healthy habits [ 16 , 37 ]. Conversely, communities where parks, recreational facilities, and well-stocked grocery stores with a variety of healthy choices are accessible motivated participants to make healthier decisions [ 15 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 30 , 33 , 35 , 36 ]. Beyond the physical environment, the social norms and economic realities of a community also influence lifestyle behaviours [ 15 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 30 , 33 , 35 – 37 ]. Sedentary leisure activities, such as watching television, were reported as a prevalent social norm that prevented people from engaging in physical activity [ 21 , 24 ]. It was challenging for participants to choose healthier options due to the widespread cultural acceptance and normalization of unhealthy behaviours like excessive alcohol consumption and sedentary lifestyles [ 36 ]. In one study, the cultural acceptance and celebration of an annual event (Bob Marley Day) led to excessive smoking [ 36 ]. This was a significant barrier to smoking cessation and the avoidance of tobacco. Community stigma, misconceptions (e.g., physical exercise is not part of the African cultures, physical exercise is for the young), and the use of traditional medicines were perceived by participants to have positive impacts on their adherence [ 26 , 35 ]. Religion and religious leaders were either facilitators or barriers [ 19 , 30 ]. For example, in one study, participants were discouraged from adhering to healthy lifestyles by their faith practice [ 19 ], while in other studies, collaboration with religious leaders [ 29 ] and biblical verses promoting spiritual and physical activities and discouraging laziness [ 17 ] motivated healthy behaviours. Technology and media were reported as both barriers (e.g., negative advertising, sedentary lifestyle from watching TV or phone use) [ 31 , 34 ] and facilitators (e.g., exercise programs on TV) [ 33 ]. Health promotion activities, such as advice or information from health experts or campaigns, also serve to motivate healthy behaviours [ 31 ]. School emerged as a significant influence on healthy behaviours, especially among adolescents [ 21 , 27 ]. School-based programs and classes, encouragement from teachers and/or coaches, and the availability of physical health education instructors all contributed to increased physical activity [ 31 ]. Contrasting this, the declining number of physical health education teachers, low prioritization of physical health education, increasing demand for classroom academic time, negative attitudinal dispositions of other teachers, inadequate funding for schools, and security threats hindered healthy behaviours within the school milieu [ 31 , 38 ]. Strengthening the capacity and reach of the healthcare system, improving the affordability and availability of services, and fostering stronger patient-provider relationships can all help to address these organizational-level barriers. Equipping healthcare providers with the knowledge and skills through continuous professional development and on-the-job training can also alleviate some of the institutional-level barriers. Discussion Preventive interventions or healthy lifestyle choices, including physical activity, a nutritious diet, and reduction of tobacco and harmful alcohol use, have played a crucial role in the prevention of CVD. However, the uptake or adoption of these interventions has been suboptimal in SSA. This systematic review identified several barriers and facilitators that either prevent or motivate people to adopt physical activity, healthy diets, reduce harmful alcohol use, smoking cessation or tobacco use, manage weight, adhere to medications, and manage blood pressure and diabetes. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no previous systematic review assessing the barriers and facilitators to adopting healthy lifestyles in SSA. The results of this review are similar to those of previous reviews conducted in other regions of the world [ 40 – 42 ]. Similar to our findings, Deslippe et al. (2023) in a qualitative systematic review of barriers and facilitators to diet, physical activity and lifestyle behaviour intervention adherence in Western populations, reported that attitudes, concern for health and physical changes, social support, social accountability, changeable and unchangeable aspects of the community, delivery and design and content at the intervention level, were either barriers or facilitators to the adoption of the preventive cardiovascular intervention. Similar results have been reported by Tsofliou et al . (2021) and Kelly et al. (2016). These similarities in results could be explained by urbanization and globalization, which have resulted in nearly similar environmental factors around the globe, such as increased availability of processed food and sedentary lifestyles [ 43 , 44 ]. Additionally, the lack of social support and community resources, limited health literacy, misconceptions and myths, and cognitive biases may be universal factors hindering the adoption of healthy lifestyles. Intrapersonal level The impact of self-efficacy beliefs on the adoption of new health behaviours, their generalization to different circumstances, and sustainability over time has been widely described in the literature [ 45 , 46 ]. A person’s perception of their ability to motivate, adopt, and engage in a specific behaviour significantly influences their ability to maintain that behaviour over time. According to Bandura (1977), an individual’s expectations of personal efficacy determine whether they will engage in a given behaviour, the effort they will exert to maintain it, and how long they will be able to sustain it in varying circumstances. The continuous practice or engagement of behaviours that pose a significant threat but are safe can enhance self-efficacy and lead to reductions in defensive behaviour (Bandura, 1977). In his proposed self-efficacy theory model, Bandura highlighted that past experiences or performance, vicarious experiences, verbal persuasion, and physiological cues were the four main sources of influence in the development of self-efficacy. Past performance or experience has the most influence on self-efficacy. An individual who consistently engages in physical activity or follows a healthy diet is likely to have self-efficacy related to that behaviour. We can leverage efficacy from past performance of a specific healthy behaviour to encourage the adoption of other healthy behaviours. In contrast, negative past experiences with a particular healthy behaviour, such as sustaining an injury during physical activity or experiencing withdrawal effects during smoking cessation, can be discouraging and decrease efficacy levels. People are more likely to live a healthy life if they are encouraged to take responsibility for their own health and if behavioural change interventions are tailored to each person’s health needs, abilities, and preferences [ 47 ]. Believing that healthy lifestyles are primarily for those with a high socioeconomic status can negatively affect the motivation to adopt such behaviours. Furthermore, perception of risk and lack of perceived susceptibility to CVD can hinder preventive action. Perceived invulnerability may prompt people to deprioritize the adoption of healthy lifestyles. According to the social cognitive theory, personal factors such as cognition have a significant influence on a person’s behaviour [ 48 ]. Based on this theory, the adoption and maintenance of behavioural changes are influenced by health knowledge: a person’s awareness of how their lifestyle choices affect their health. Improving health-related knowledge by providing information on the impact of healthy lifestyle choices on the risk for CVD through targeted health education campaigns that emphasize the personal relevance and urgency of CVD prevention will contribute to the widespread adoption and maintenance of preventative measures for CVD within SSA [ 8 , 49 , 50 ]. Additionally, it is essential to present healthy lifestyles as attainable and desirable goals for all community members, regardless of socioeconomic status. Helping people set specific and achievable goals, begin with minor changes, and track or monitor progress while celebrating small victories can help improve self-motivation and self-discipline. Additionally, surrounding oneself with supportive friends or groups who share the same goals can be very helpful in adopting a healthy lifestyle [ 49 ]. Interpersonal level Interpersonal barriers and facilitators revolve around family and social support, peer pressure, family practices, and role models. Previous studies have shown that in many African homes, the wife or mother is typically responsible for food preparation [ 51 – 53 ]. Hence, the type of food consumed in a household is usually determined by her. Wives and mothers who are unaware of the importance of healthy meals are less likely to prepare such meals for their households [ 54 ]. Our findings suggest that empowering mothers and wives with knowledge about healthy meals may help promote healthy meal preparation and consumption in households. This can be achieved by implementing awareness-raising activities specifically targeting mothers or women in general. Additionally, our results suggest that positive parental influence may help cultivate healthy lifestyle habits in children. For instance, children who regularly observe their parents exercising or eating healthy meals may be motivated and feel more confident in their own ability to exercise and maintain a healthy diet routinely [ 55 ]. Bandura’s theory suggests that vicarious experiences are even more persuasive if an individual considers the person observed as similar to themselves. Evidence from literature shows that the self-efficacy of adolescents in adopting healthy lifestyles increases when they are surrounded by positive role models who share certain characteristics with them, such as age [ 45 , 56 – 58 ]. A study by Wang et al. (2014) showed that support from a friend was associated with increased fruit and vegetable consumption and decreased added sugar intake while support from family and/or a friend for physical activity, and family modelling of physical activity significantly increased the number of days/week active for ≥60 min. Reinforcing parental and peer support is therefore an essential strategy for promoting healthy lifestyles. Institutional level Approachability and trust in healthcare providers were also important barriers. Previous studies have shown that people hesitate to discuss the challenges they encountered in adopting healthy lifestyles if they do not feel comfortable or have had negative past experiences with their healthcare provider [ 59 ]. Healthcare workforce shortages and the unavailability of preventive services have been extensively described in literature as obstacles to promoting healthy lifestyles in SSA [ 1 , 60 , 61 ]. In many SSA countries, the healthcare infrastructure is often overburdened and underfunded; there is a rarity of community-based health promotion programs, with a shortage of trained medical personnel, inadequate training of providers in preventive care, and limited availability of essential medications and equipment [ 1 , 60 , 61 ]. This hinders the ability of healthcare providers to deliver comprehensive, personalized support for disease prevention. Additionally, providers may not provide enough behavioural counselling consistently due to limited visit time and insufficient financial incentives for health promotion. Health education received from healthcare providers has been shown to significantly influence patients’ motivation and ability to initiate and maintain healthy behaviours [ 59 ]. Equipping healthcare providers with the proper knowledge and skills through continuous professional development and on-the-job training can also alleviate some of the institutional-level barriers [ 59 ]. The 5 A’s framework refers to 5 counselling steps that a provider can use to facilitate health behaviour change: (1) assess the risk behaviour, (2) advise change, (3) agree on goals and an action plan via shared decision-making, (4) assist with treatment, and (5) arrange follow-up [ 62 ]. It has been successfully used to achieve significant results in a variety of health behaviours, including smoking cessation, dietary changes, and physical activity [ 63 , 64 ]. Moreover, ethnic and cultural tailoring of health education and counselling can further facilitate behavioural changes. Improving affordability (e.g., through subsidization), increasing the quantity and quality of healthcare services (e.g., through healthcare workforce on-the-job training), contextualization of health education (e.g., using culturally informed interventions), and fostering stronger institution-community relationships can address some of these organizational-level barriers. In resource-constrained institutions, integrating cardiovascular health promotion into existing public health programs, such as those addressing HIV/AIDS, could help leverage existing resources and reach more people. Workplace wellness programs, including the provision and promotion of nutritious meal options in workplace cafeterias and schools, as well as regular fitness classes, can foster a culture of health within the workplace. Public health interventions that raise awareness through traditional and social media, as well as the distribution of educational leaflets in healthcare facilities, and the implementation of comprehensive policies for health promotion are crucial. Community level The sociocultural, economic, and physical characteristics of the community had a significant influence on the lifestyles and behaviours of many participants. This is consistent with the findings from other systematic reviews [ 40 , 42 ]. These similarities can be attributed to globalization, which has facilitated the exchange of cultural practices, values, and ideas, resulting in sociocultural similarities across different regions of the world. Also, global economic systems and trade have created economic interdependence among nations, resulting in nearly similar economic challenges and opportunities. Creating environments that consistently make healthy choices accessible to local inhabitants—such as encouraging local production of fruits and vegetables by providing incentives or support to farmers, promoting locally sourced ingredients, and establishing farmers’ markets—regardless of socioeconomic status or geographic location—is crucial [ 65 ]. Previous studies have shown that even when healthy food choices are accessible, affordability or limited finances can hinder people from getting them [ 8 , 66 , 67 ]. Furthermore, the high prevalence of poverty and food insecurity in many parts of SSA may cause people to prioritize immediate survival needs over prevention of CVD [ 50 , 61 , 66 , 68 ]. Initiatives such as zoning regulations, restrictions on advertising to children, and taxation can limit the proliferation of unhealthy food outlets [ 69 , 70 ]. Prioritizing and promoting nutritional education in schools (e.g., teaching skills for healthy cooking), workplaces, and communities can empower individuals to make healthier, informed choices. Investing in the development or rehabilitation of community infrastructure to create more accessible and safe spaces for exercise and recreation is important. While increasing infrastructure availability is important, promoting its use is equally crucial, as availability does not necessarily translate to usage. Consequently, educational and awareness-raising campaigns and workshops to raise awareness and promote usage of these infrastructures are crucial. Improving community engagement and participation (e.g., through local health committees and volunteer programs, creation of community groups or clubs to encourage collective participation in healthy activities, communal gardens, community food festivals and peer support programs) can build a sense of community and shared goals, which can motivate and support individuals to adopt healthy behaviours. Communities should actively participate in promoting local food traditions and designing and implementing health promotion programs. Another feasible strategy is to engage community and religious leaders, as well as local influencers, in promoting healthy lifestyles and creating culturally appropriate health promotion programs that are contextually relevant. Additionally, collaborating with community and religious leaders to reframe certain cultural beliefs and norms that hinder the adoption of healthy lifestyles in a manner that promotes health and wellness while preserving cultural diversity. Technology can be leveraged to promote a deeper u, enticing advertisements), the creation of online platforms and food delivery services for healthy foods, and the use of social media platforms (e.g., enticing advertisements), the creation of online platforms and food delivery services for healthy foods, and the use of social media platforms (e.g., leveraging influencers and advertisements for health promotion activities targeting especially younger demographics) can facilitate the adoption of healthy lifestyles. Advocacy at all levels is paramount. For example, advocating for policies that promote healthy lifestyles, such as urban planning with bike lanes and pedestrian paths, school nutrition policies, responsible marketing practices, and higher taxes on unhealthy food items. School-based interventions, such as food and nutrition courses, school-feeding programs that provide healthier school meals, and restrictions on the sale of unhealthy snacks in institutions are effective measures. Educating and encouraging parents to prepare healthy nutritious for their children, increasing the number of health promotion facilitators (e.g., physical exercise instructors), allocating more time for health promotion activities can create a supportive environment that encourages healthier choices from a young age. School feeding programs have played a pivotal role in influencing dietary habits and lifestyles in children in many countries in SSA [ 71 ]. Figure 2 summarizes potential strategies to address the barriers identified in this study. Fig. 2 Summary of proposed strategies to improve adoption of healthy lifestyles Strengths and limitations To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review exploring the barriers and facilitators to the uptake of interventions for the prevention of CVD in SSA. We appraised and represented the evidence for both men and women, youths and adults, and rural and urban settings. The evidence generated can be used to design and implement targeted and contextualized strategies to improve the adoption of healthy lifestyles and health promotion for CVD in SSA. Policy-level barriers and facilitators have a significant influence on lifestyle choices. However, we did not assess and include barriers and facilitators at the policy level. Furthermore, we did not include studies from French-speaking SSA countries, which constitute a significant portion of the SSA population. Conclusion A complex interplay between barriers and facilitators acting at multiple levels influences the adoption of healthy lifestyles in SSA, which is further compounded by deeply rooted social determinants of health. A multi-sectoral approach that empowers individuals, strengthens community support systems, improves access to affordable healthy options, and implements supportive policies is imperative. Additionally, education and awareness-raising on the importance of healthy lifestyles should begin with self-education at home, rather than relying solely on government and policy changes. Implications for practice There are multi-level barriers and facilitators to the adoption of healthy lifestyles for CVD prevention in SSA. Addressing the barriers requires comprehensive, multi-pronged, and intersectoral approaches that extend beyond individual behaviour change. Intrapersonal, interpersonal, institutional, and community-level strategies involving policymakers, community leaders, and local populations need to be implemented synergistically. Implications for research Future systematic reviews should include evidence on the barriers and facilitators at the policy level and should include studies from French-speaking countries in SSA. Additionally, clinical trials to provide more robust evidence on the barriers and facilitators to the adoption of healthy lifestyles in SSA as well as to identify effective strategies to address barriers are warranted.