Introduction The U.S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices’ (ACIP) immunization schedule details the vaccinations recommended at birth and 1-2, 2, 4, 6, 12-15, and 15-18 months of age. Since 1994, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has monitored national and state vaccination coverage through the annual National Immunization Survey-Child (NIS-Child). Stratifications by metropolitan statistical area (MSA) have shown persistent disparities in early childhood vaccination coverage. For example, among U.S. children born in 2018-2019, coverage for the combined 7-vaccine series by age 24 months was 6.0 percentage points lower for those living in a non-MSA (i.e., more rural) county compared to children living in an MSA with a principal city (i.e., an urban area). 1 The combined 7-vaccine series measures completion of diphtheria-tetanus-acellular pertussis (DTaP; ≥4 doses), inactivated poliovirus (IPV; ≥3 doses), measles-mumps-rubella (MMR; ≥1 dose), 1 Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib; ≥3 or ≥4 doses, depending on product type), hepatitis B (HepB; ≥3 doses), varicella (≥1 dose), and pneumococcal conjugate (PCV; ≥4 doses) vaccinations, all of which are recommended to be completed by age 19 months. To date, most surveillance of childhood vaccination in the U.S. has measured coverage, which is the percentage of children who completed recommended vaccinations by a certain age, like their 2 nd birthday. However, such measures do not indicate whether children received vaccinations on time, by the ages recommended by the ACIP. Timely receipt of preventive care is an essential component of health care quality , and children who are late or fall behind on vaccinations are at higher risk of vaccine-preventable diseases as compared to children who receive vaccines on-time. 2 Furthermore, for vaccinations that involve multiple doses, coverage measures do not distinguish between children who did not receive any doses and children who started but failed to complete these series. Surveys of parents have shown that the pattern of not receiving any doses of a recommended vaccination is largely reflective of parental choice to not vaccinate 3 - 5 ; this pattern has been referred to as “selective” vaccination. 6 , 7 In comparison, the pattern of starting all recommended vaccinations but missing doses needed to complete multidose vaccinations suggests practical challenges to accessing timely immunization services, including parents potentially not knowing additional doses are due. 8 , 9 Since interventions to address parental hesitancy vary greatly from interventions to address non-attitudinal reasons for undervaccination, distinguishing such patterns is valuable for targeting public health efforts to increase vaccination uptake. 10 , 11 While many barriers to accessing health services are more pronounced in rural areas, rural-urban differences in childhood vaccination timeliness and patterns have not been closely examined. While the CDC does monitor national vaccination coverage by county-level MSA designation 12 , in this study we utilized a finer measure of rurality, ZIP code-level rural-urban commuting area (RUCA). Often used in health services research, RUCA incorporates data on daily commuting and rurality based on both population size as well as economic integration of adjacent areas to more urbanized areas. 13 , 14 Through analyses of vaccination records collected in the NIS-Child from birth through age 23 months (inclusive), the objective of this study was to quantify trends and differences in vaccination coverage, timeliness, and patterns, among U.S. children born 2014-2018 by RUCA. 15 - 18 Methods Study Sample The CDC sponsors the annual NIS-Child to monitor vaccination coverage among U.S. children ages 19-35 months. Parents/caregivers of age-eligible children are contacted through a randomdigit-dialing method. Following parental consent, immunization providers are mailed a questionnaire and are asked to report children’s immunization histories. 19 - 21 The CDC makes public-use datasets available, with state as the finest level of child’s residence. Following an approval process, the National Center of Health Statistics (NCHS), which oversees analyses of restricted NIS-Child variables, linked ZIP code of child’s residence for our study population with RUCA codes , which categorize ZIP codes on a metropolitan-isolated rural spectrum based on population, urbanization, and commuting patterns. 22 RUCA delineations include primary and secondary codes; secondary codes provide an additional layer of information about commuting patterns. 23 This study used secondary RUCA codes developed using 2010 Decennial Census and 2006-2010 American Community Survey data. Based on prior research, secondary RUCA codes were categorized as urban-focused (urban), large rural city/town focused (large rural), small rural town-focused (small town), and isolated small rural town-focused (rural) ( 22 , 23 Appendix Table 1 ). 16 , 18 , 24 , 25 Birth year is not available in NIS-Child public-use files; therefore, NCHS linked the birth year variable to the analytic dataset. Since restricted-use variables were accessed, all analyses were conducted at a NCHS Research Data Center. Data were analyzed November 2023 - January 2024. At the time of analysis, the 2021 NIS-Child was the most recent with data available to outside researchers, and data needed for birth cohort-level analyses for children born 2014-2018, collected in the 2015-2021 NIS-Child, could be accessed. The study population included U.S. children born 2014-2018 who were surveyed at ages 24-35 months, and for whom provider-verified vaccination records were available. The percentage of surveyed children with provider-verified records ranged from 49.4% to 56.2% across the survey years included in analyses. 26 Measures Vaccination coverage, timeliness, and patterns were assessed using provider-verified records collected from birth through age 23 months (inclusive). We focused on the seven vaccinations included in CDC’s combined 7-vaccine series coverage measure. Vaccination coverage was defined as having received all recommended vaccine doses (i.e., being up-to-date). Timeliness was assessed by measuring days undervaccinated, which is the difference between the age when a child received a vaccine and the age when the vaccine should have been administered, per ACIP guidelines ( Appendix Table 2 ). Then, based on immunization histories from ages 0-23 months (inclusive), children were categorized into five mutually-exclusive patterns: (1) up-to-date on all seven vaccinations by age 24 months, with all doses received on-time, (2) up-to-date on all seven vaccinations by age 24 months, but some doses were late (i.e., ≥1 day undervaccinated), (3) started all seven vaccinations but missing ≥1 dose(s) from a multidose vaccine series, (4) did not initiate ≥1 of the seven vaccine series (i.e., selective vaccination), and (5) did not receive any vaccines in the combined 7-vaccine series (i.e., completely unvaccinated). 27 , 28 Statistical Analysis The number of children in each birth cohort and RUCA category were reported, as were demographic, socioeconomic and household characteristics, as reported by the parents completing the NIS-Child. Coverage by age 24 months was reported for each vaccination, and for the combined 7-vaccine series overall, stratified by RUCA. For each birth cohort, the prevalence of vaccination patterns, with 95% confidence intervals (CI), were reported overall and stratified by RUCA. Changes in vaccination coverage and patterns by birth cohort were assessed using log-binomial regression models with birth year modeled as an independent variable, overall and stratified by RUCA. We then analyzed trends in patterns across three different regression models. For the primary analysis, the outcome of interest was on-time completion of the combined 7-vaccine series, analyzed within the entire study population. Then, two secondary analyses were conducted based on whether the child had completed all vaccinations by age 24 months. Within the first sub-cohort of children who were up-to-date, the outcome of completing all recommended vaccinations on-time (versus having received some or all vaccinations late) was modeled. Within the second sub-cohort of children who were not up-to-date, the outcome of not starting ≥1 vaccination series (versus having started all seven vaccinations but failing to complete ≥1 multidose vaccine series) was modeled. For each analysis, the main interest was to assess whether the trend in the prevalence of the vaccination pattern varied by RUCA. Therefore, all multivariable models included an interaction term between birth year, modeled as a continuous variable, and RUCA. Models were adjusted for child’s sex, race and ethnicity, age at time of survey, Census region, whether the child had moved across state lines since birth, the number of immunization providers, facility type(s) where vaccines were received, maternal education level, number of children in the household, whether or not the child ever received Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) benefits, poverty status, home ownership, and health insurance coverage. These variables were selected a priori because they may be associated with vaccination outcomes and there may have been temporal trends in such factors. In NIS-Child data, the child’s race and ethnicity are reported as a combined variable in four categories: 1) Hispanic, 2) non-Hispanic White only, 3) non-Hispanic Black only, 4) non-Hispanic and not Black or White only, or multiple races. All analyses accounted for NIS-Child’s complex survey design, including weighting for this nationally-representative survey. Analyses were conducted using SAS ® version 9.4 (Cary, NC). The University of Montana IRB approved this study under the exempt category of review; in accordance with 45 CFR §46, informed consent was not required for secondary analyses of NIS-Child datasets. The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines for cross-sectional studies were followed. Results The study population of N=59,361 children included n=48,241 (87.7%, weighted) living in urban areas, n=5,888 (7.1%) in large rural areas, n=2,752 (3.0%) in small towns, and n=2,480 (2.2%) in rural areas. Due to small sample sizes when stratified by birth year, the small town and rural classifications were combined for analyses ( Table 1 ). Surveyed children represented a population that was 50.8% male, and 27.3% Hispanic, 12.7% non-Hispanic Black, 46.4% non-Hispanic White, and 13.6% non-Hispanic children of other and multiple races ( Table 2 ). With the exception of Hib, coverage for each vaccination, as well as completion of the combined 7-vaccine series, by age 24 months significantly improved across birth cohorts (p<.05 for all vaccines except Hib; Hib p-value=.43). When stratified by RUCA, with the exception of Hib vaccination, coverage for all vaccinations increased significantly (p<.05) across birth cohorts for children living in urban areas, but not in large rural or small town/rural areas ( Appendix Table 3 ). Within the most recent birth cohort analyzed (2018), combined 7-vaccine series coverage was 71.2% (95% CI: 69.6%−72.9%) among children in urban areas, 64.9% (95% CI: 58.8%−71.0%) in large rural areas, and 62.6% (95% CI: 56.2%−68.9%) in small town/rural areas. For individual vaccinations, the largest disparities by rurality were observed with the multi-dose DTaP, Hib, and PCV series. For example, among children born in 2018, coverage with four DTaP doses was 83.2% (95% CI: 81.9%−84.6%) in urban and 73.7% (95% CI: 68.1%−79.2%) in rural areas. Trends in some vaccination patterns differed by RUCA ( Table 3 ). Among urban children, the percentage who received all vaccinations on-time increased from 28.7% (95% CI: 27.0%−30.4%) in the 2014 birth cohort to 37.1% (95% CI: 35.4%−38.8%) in 2018 (p<.001). There was also a significant increase in on-time vaccination for children in large rural areas, from 25.7% (95% CI: 20.8%−30.5%) in 2014 to 32.9% (95% CI: 27.5%−38.2%) in 2018 (p=.02). However, there was no significant trend in on-time vaccination for children in small town/rural areas (2014 cohort: 27.2% [95% CI: 22.0%−32.5%]; 2018 cohort: 28.6% [95% CI: 23.8%−33.5%], p=.68). Among urban children, the percentage with a vaccination pattern of selective vaccination (i.e., received some vaccinations but did not start one or more of the seven vaccine series) decreased from 10.6% (95% CI: 9.3%−12.0%) in 2014 to 8.2% (95% CI: 7.2%−9.3%) in 2018 (p=.04). However, there was no significant trend among children in large rural areas (2014 cohort: 15.3% [95% CI: 8.8%−21.8%], 2018 cohort: 12.6% [95% CI: 7.7%−17.4%], p=.48) or in small town/rural areas (2014 cohort: 10.8% [95% CI: 7.3%−14.2%]; 2018 cohort: 12.0%, [95% CI: 7.8%−16.3%], p=.53). Among small town/rural children, the prevalence of children who were completely unvaccinated significantly decreased from 3.0% (95% CI: 1.4%−4.6%) in 2014 to 0.7% (95% CI: 0.3%−1.1%) in 2018 (p<.01). The same results with prevalence of vaccination patterns by survey year, but grouped by RUCA level, is shown in Appendix Table 4 . About 94.9% (n=56,356) of the study population had data on all covariates and were included in the primary multivariable model. There was a significant increase across birth cohorts in on-time vaccination for the combined 7-vaccine series among children in urban areas (adjusted prevalence ratio [aPR]: 1.06 [95% CI: 1.05-1.08]; Table 4 ). The interaction of birth year and RUCA was significant, with rural children having a lower rate of improvement in on-time vaccination as compared to urban (interaction aPR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.88–0.99). In the secondary analysis of the first sub-cohort of children who were up-to-date by age 24 months, there was a significant increase in on-time vaccination among urban children (aPR: 1.05, 95% CI: 1.04-1.07). The interaction of birth year and RUCA was not significant, meaning this trend did not significantly differ by rurality (interaction for large rural: aPR: 1.01 [95% CI: 0.96-1.06]; for small town/rural areas: aPR: 0.96 [95% CI: 0.91 – 1.01]). In secondary analysis of the second sub-cohort children who were not up-to-date by age 24 months, there was not a significant trend across birth cohorts in the prevalence of children that were missing entire vaccinations series among urban children (aPR: 0.97,95% CI: 0.94-1.01). The interaction of birth year and RUCA was not significant, implying this trend did not significantly differ for children living in large rural areas (interaction aPR: 0.98, 95% CI: 0.88-1.10) or small town/rural areas (interaction aPR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.90 – 1.12). Discussion For this study, serial cross-sectional analyses of data collected in NIS-Child, a nationally representative annual survey, were conducted. While coverage for the combined 7-vaccine series improved overall across 2014-2018 birth cohorts, coverage was higher in urban compared to large rural and small town/rural areas. Furthermore, while there were significant improvements in on-time vaccination among children in urban and large rural areas, the rate of improvement across birth cohorts was lower among children living in small town/rural areas. One promising finding was that the prevalence of children living in small town/rural areas who received zero vaccinations significantly decreased from the 2014 to 2018 birth cohorts. Otherwise, while the study’s results point to increasing prevalence of routine and timely vaccination in urban areas, improvements were less evident among children in small town/rural areas. The CDC uses NIS-Child to provide annual reporting on national vaccination coverage at age 24 months stratified by MSA. This study improved upon those efforts, in two ways. First, although MSA accounts for proximity to large population centers, it is measured at the county level, and has been criticized for masking health outcomes in rural areas that are nestled within larger counties. 1 In this study, vaccination outcomes were examined by RUCA, measured at the ZIP code level. RUCA is the most commonly used measure of rurality in health services research 17 , 29 , and compared to other measures, it better distinguishes sparsely-populated areas that do and do not have connectivity to more densely-populated areas where health services are typically clustered. 17 Second, along with examining vaccination coverage, timeliness and patterns were also examined. Results indicated that the prevalence of on-time vaccination was lower in small town/rural areas as compared to urban areas. 15 While parental vaccine hesitancy has received much attention in recent years, receiving some vaccinations late and missing doses needed to complete multidose series are indicative of practical, non-attitudinal challenges. While the NIS-Child does not collect information on why children are undervaccinated, prior research has identified parents not being able to readily schedule, travel to, or take time off work for appointments as reasons that children fall behind on preventive care services, including vaccinations. 10 , 11 In addition, parents not knowing when to bring children in for vaccines likely contributes to late vaccinations and failing to complete multidose series. 12 , 30 , 31 While large health systems often have resources to implement reminder-recall programs to alert parents when vaccines are due, smaller rural clinics may lack such resources. As an evidence-based strategy for increasing timely vaccination and completion of multidose series, future efforts should seek to boost implementation of reminder-recall in rural areas, including funding for public health departments to undertake such efforts. 10 , 11 , 32 33 A key strength of the NIS-Child is that it collects information on socioeconomic and demographic factors, which we were able to adjust for in multivariable analyses of on-time vaccination. However, the NIS-Child is limited by small sample sizes within states and a time lag between when vaccinations occur and when the survey is conducted. In contrast, immunization information systems (IIS) hold great promise for surveillance of vaccination uptake in rural populations, given their large sample size and near real-time reporting. IIS are centralized repositories of individuals’ vaccination records, and are maintained in every U.S. state. Although IIS were designed for clinical use, these data are a rich source for population-level vaccination surveillance. Moving forward, state public health departments should consider IIS-based monitoring of vaccination coverage, timeliness and patterns across a rural-urban spectrum to inform targeted interventions to improve timely childhood vaccination. 34 , 35 Limitations Due to small sample sizes, RUCA categories were combined for small town and rural, an approach that has been used elsewhere. As a result, differences that may exist between small town and rural areas were not examined. Furthermore, these areas have smaller populations and thus smaller sample sizes in the NIS-Child, which may have contributed to a lack of statistically significant trends. Ample descriptive statistics on vaccination outcomes across RUCA categories were provided in an effort to minimize reliance on statistical testing in results interpretation. Another limitation is that trends were only quantified across five birth cohorts. Birth year is a restricted-use variable, and while data from earlier birth cohorts were requested, the weight variables needed to conduct birth cohort-based analyses were only provided starting with the 2014 cohort. Of note, the CDC only started regularly reporting vaccination coverage by birth cohort following the 2015 NIS-Child survey 16 , 18 , 25 ; prior to that point, surveillance was by survey year. Finally, analyses focused on seven vaccinations that have been universally recommended for over twenty years. Other vaccinations, including influenza, COVID-19, Hepatitis A, and rotavirus, which are also routinely recommended for young children (albeit with more recent universal recommendations) were not examined. 36 Conclusions This study improved upon current vaccination surveillance activities by reporting on trends in vaccination coverage, timeliness, and patterns by RUCA using nationally-representative data. Targeted efforts are needed to address persistent immunization disparities among children in rural areas, including improving vaccination access and funding efforts to implement reminder-recall programs. Future work should also include more robust surveillance of vaccination outcomes across a rural-urban spectrum using IIS data. Supplementary Material