Introduction Pediatric obesity is a global public health problem that threatens the current health and future life expectancy of youth. Obesity results from interactions among multi-level risk factors, has both immediate and long-term physical and mental health consequences, and tends to carry forward across the lifespan. 1 A study examining body mass transitions in over 65,000 children ages 3–15 years old showed that those who were in the normal or obese weight range at the age of three tended to maintain their weight status for the next 13 years. 2 – 5 Similarly, a systemic review and meta-analysis that examined how well childhood obesity predicted later obesity found that children and adolescents in the obese vs. non-obese weight range were five times more likely to be in the obese weight range as adults. 4 These studies highlight the need to understand how risk factors for obesity (e.g., physical inactivity, poor dietary quality, sedentary behavior) accumulate over time and the importance of strategically leveraging modifiable protective factors (e.g., maternal prenatal health, positive parenting practices) to disrupt disease progression. 5 Developmental cascades (DCs), defined as “cumulative consequences” occurring over time that result in spreading downstream effects within and across domains, offer a perspective from which to view obesity developmentally and ecologically. Cascading effects are also referred to in the literature as “snowball,” “amplification,” “spillover” or “progressive” effects. Importantly, DC models work to elucidate the mechanisms and processes through which early risk factors impact later outcomes across development. 6 , 7 They have been successfully used to better understand the progression of a range of youth outcomes including substance use and problem behavior. 7 Dishion and colleagues, for example, found that problem behavior, peer marginalization, and poor academic performance between the ages of 11–12 years old significantly predicted gang involvement at the ages of 13–14 years old. 8 – 17 Gang involvement, in turn, predicted peer deviancy training between the ages of 16–17 years old, which predicted violence between the ages of 18–19 years old. Despite their utility for understanding complex youth outcomes resulting from dynamic interactions and transactions across multiple domains, however, there is a gap between the developmental science literature on cascades and the state of knowledge about cascades in the development of obesity. DC models have only recently been used to conceptualize pediatric obesity. 8 18 Smith and colleagues used a theory-driven model-building approach and scoping review of 310 longitudinal studies to develop the first conceptual DC model of pediatric obesity. This empirically-derived model was intended to inform future hypotheses about the different pathways and constructs that contribute to the outcome of obesity in youth. According to Smith et al. ( 18 Figure 1 ; reprinted figure), risk and protective factors for pediatric obesity with robust empirical support include maternal health and socioeconomic influences (during the prenatal-infants stage), nutrition/dietary intake and rapid weight gain/adiposity rebound (during the toddlers-preschoolers stage), and nutrition/dietary intake and physical activity/sedentary behaviors (during both the school age children and adolescents-teenagers stages). Beyond these developmentally-specific risk and protective factors, the model identifies processes that may amplify one’s risk for obesity from one developmental stage to the next. These include: adverse events/stress, temperament, self-regulation, inhibitory control, and self-esteem. Importantly, the model highlights the relevance of parental influences and family management practices across development (i.e., parenting styles, feeding practices, family functioning, relationship quality, and support) that have the ability to inhibit or accelerate the cascade. The model also acknowledges that all these constructs are embedded within distal ecological systems (e.g., neighborhoods, institutions, and communities) but focuses on intra-and inter-individual child processes and mechanisms. Finally, given existing gender differences in pediatric obesity, the model considers the important role of child gender as a potential moderating variable of the DC. DC models can offer unique insights for prevention by identifying timely opportunities to target specific risk and/or protective factors and elucidating mediating processes that may either promote positive or interrupt negative cascades. Such an approach has been used successfully in the prevention of child problem behaviors and later delinquency-related outcomes. However, it is unclear how consistent existing obesity prevention interventions, which we defined as those that prevent 19 – 21 and/or reduce obesity/excess weight gain, are with the DC model of pediatric obesity in terms of targeting relevant risk and protective factors and cascade processes (i.e., all those listed in bold in Figure 1 ). Systematic reviews and/or meta-analyses of pediatric obesity prevention interventions published in the last five years have followed rigorous review methodology (e.g., comprehensive search strategies across several databases) and have found that although effect sizes are generally small, 22 – 29 interventions with the most promise are those delivered in school settings that additionally include a home-based component (e.g., parent outreach). 23 , 25 , 27 , 29 Limitations of these reviews include the tendency to focus on one or two specific developmental stages 22 , 29 and no systematic reporting of potential differences in intervention strategies and effects by developmental stage. 24 , 26 , 28 These reviews have also included studies with varying designs (e.g., quasi-experimental, natural experiments, randomized controlled trials (RCTs)) 22 , 25 , 27 , 29 and cite study heterogeneity as a barrier to determining features that contribute to intervention efficacy. 22 , 26 , 27 , 29 Notably, none of the reviews that include RCTs specifically report information related to testing and reporting of interventions’ mechanisms of action (i.e., mediators) and moderators of intervention effects. As such, little is known about the pathways by which these interventions exert their effects or for whom they work best across and within developmental stages. 22 , 25 Using the DC model as an organizing framework to present the results, this study aims to inform future obesity prevention efforts by conducting a systematic review to (1) identify and describe preventive interventions from infancy through late adolescence reporting immediate and sustained effects on weight status and/or related health behaviors (physical activity, sedentary behavior, diet), and (2) provide recommendations for pediatric obesity prevention in light of the DC model. Methods Search Strategy and Eligibility Criteria In accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines , we conducted a thorough search of the electronic databases PubMed, PsycINFO, and SCOPUS using the following medical subject headings or keywords: overweight/obese, nutrition, physical activity, sedentary behavior, prevention, and intervention. See 30 Table 1 for the detailed search strategy used for PubMed. Author YA ran searches on March 25, 2015 (for articles published between January 1995-February 2015), September 28, 2016 (for articles published between March 2015-September 2016), February 7, 2018 (for articles published between October 2016-December 2017), February 5, 2019 (for articles published between January 2018-January 2019), and April 4, 2019 (for articles published between February 2019-April 2019). Authors exported search results from each database to the citation management software EndNote (Desktop version X7 and EndNote Web) to eliminate duplicates and facilitate ease of shared access to full-text articles by the study team. Before conducting the search, we specified study inclusion and exclusion criteria and developed an internal protocol and standardized Microsoft Excel document to guide the extraction of relevant information from each intervention. We included interventions in this review if they: (1) were RCTs, (2) had outcome papers published in peer-reviewed journals between January 1995 and April 2019, (3) were written in the English language, (4) targeted youth from the prenatal stage through late adolescence (0–18 years old), and (5) reported effects on youth weight status, physical activity, sedentary behavior, or dietary variables (e.g., fruit and vegetable intake, sugar-sweetened beverage intake) as primary or secondary outcomes. We excluded pilot studies, review papers, and RCTs solely involving participants with chronic medical conditions (e.g., cancer, type 2 diabetes) or serious mental illness (e.g., psychosis). Because the purpose of this review was to examine interventions using the DC model as an organizing framework, we decided to exclude those with only pre-and immediate post-intervention assessments or with a post-intervention follow-up period less than six months from the end of intervention delivery. We additionally sought out published baseline/protocol papers to gather details on each of the included interventions that were not found in the original article. Study Selection and Data Collection We conducted the review in three phases: (1) title and abstract screening, (2) full text review and data extraction, and (3) cross-checking. See Figure 2 for the PRISMA flow diagram of selected studies, which contains the combined results across all five searches and lists reasons why studies were excluded at each of the aforementioned phases. After removal of 373 duplicates, the search yielded a total of 2,692 potentially eligible articles. Two authors conducted the title and abstract screening and five authors participated in the extraction and cross-checking of information across the various searchers in the study. Percentage agreement was calculated on a subset of 50 studies from the initial search, and because it was high (94%), authors proceeded independently with the remainder of the title and abstract screening. We organized reasons for excluding studies into the following categories and screened them accordingly: 1) not an RCT, 2) not outcomes of interest, 3) demographic criteria (e.g., age) not met, 4) pilot/feasibility study, 5) no post-intervention follow-up or follow-up < six months. We decided that once a study fit into one of the aforementioned categories, it would be documented as the reason for exclusion (e.g., a study that was an RCT and reported outcomes of interest in adults > 18 years was excluded for reason #3, even if it was also a pilot study with no follow-up period). We resolved discrepancies through discussions at scheduled study team meetings, where authors who had uncertainty regarding the inclusion or exclusion of any particular study sought input from the lead authors. We contacted five study authors to request full text versions of papers we were unable to access or to clarify study inclusion; three responded. In the instances that the authors did not respond, we determined eligibility based on the abstract only. We included 704 articles in the full text review phase. During this phase, we excluded another 630 articles due to not meeting study inclusion criteria. We subsequently extracted data from 74 interventions reported across 141 articles. The lead authors created an electronic data extraction file in Microsoft Excel, and together with the study team, developed a list of decision rules to guide the extraction process (e.g., report study sample size and participant characteristics from baseline; determine youth developmental stage using the mean age of study participants). We extracted data on the following from each study: 1) general study information (i.e., authors, publication year, journal, country); 2) participant characteristics (i.e., sample size, developmental stage/age, demographics (sex, race/ethnicity, weight status)); 3) intervention characteristics (i.e., name, duration, theoretical framework, strategies, and outcomes of interest assessed); 4) between-group effects for outcomes of interest at post-intervention and follow-up assessment points (coded as either “+” (indicating a significant between-group difference in favor of the experimental condition), “-” (indicating a significant between-group difference in favor of the comparison condition), or “0” (indicating no significant between-group difference)); and 5) presence of formal mediation analyses, moderation analyses, or analyses examining effects of the intervention on theoretically-relevant potential mediating variables. We classified each study by type of prevention intervention using the Institute of Medicine’s protractor model. This model places prevention on a continuum based on a population’s risk for a condition and identifies three subtypes of prevention (i.e., universal, selective, or indicated). We classified studies as “universal” if they included participants regardless of weight status or applied the intervention broadly (e.g., school-based), “selective” if the majority of youth fell into the overweight category at baseline or were specifically recruited due to being at-risk for obesity (e.g., ethnic minority, low income), or “indicated” if the majority of youth fell into the obese category at baseline or the intervention specifically targeted reductions in weight. We also assessed risk of bias for all included studies across five domains (i.e., sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of study personnel, incomplete outcome data, and selective outcome reporting) using the Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomized trials. 31 Specifically, each intervention received an indication of “yes,” (low risk of bias), “no” (high risk of bias) or “unclear” (insufficient detail provided) for each of the five domains. Once the initial round of data extraction was complete, we randomly assigned each included study to a different author, who cross-checked all extracted information for accuracy. We resolved discrepancies through discussions at study team meetings and/or through consulting the lead authors. 32 Results We included 74 distinct interventions reported across 141 published articles in this review. We organized interventions into five categories based on the child’s age at baseline: prenatal/infancy (< 2 years; n = 4), early childhood (2–5 years; n = 11), childhood (6–11 years; n = 38), early adolescence (12–15 years; n = 18), and late adolescence (16–18 years; n = 3). Table 2 summarizes general study characteristics and Table 3 the intervention characteristics and effects. Prenatal/Infancy (< 2 yrs) General study characteristics. We reviewed four distinct interventions reported across 13 published articles for the prenatal/infancy developmental stage. Three of these, classified as universal prevention, had moderate (n = 454 and 698) to large (n = 17,046 mother-infant dyads) sample sizes while the other, Healthy Moms (n = 114), was smaller. 33 – 45 Because this study targeted women who were pregnant and in the obese weight range (the intervention was delivered prenatally), we classified it as selective prevention (in reference to the child). Across the four studies, infant age at baseline ranged from 15 weeks gestation to 4.3 months old, and each study included a fairly even ratio of females to males. Length of follow-up ranged from 1–11.5 years. 43 – 45 Intervention characteristics. The duration of prenatal/infancy interventions ranged from 12 weekly group sessions to four sessions delivered across an 18-month period. Mothers were the primary recipients of each of these interventions. Two of the universal prevention interventions, NOURISH RCT and Baby Teeth Talk, targeted infant feeding practices at the family level. NOURISH aimed to promote healthy infant feeding in first-time Australian mothers through goal-setting, identifying barriers/facilitators, self-monitoring, and problem-solving. Baby Teeth Talk was an oral health intervention that aimed to reduce sugar intake and improve nutrition in disadvantaged Aboriginal families. 33 – 38 Mothers received anticipatory guidance on child health-related behaviors and participated in a series of motivational interviewing sessions from pregnancy until the child was 18 months of age. Although PROBIT was also a universal prevention intervention that targeted infant feeding practices, it was delivered at the hospital level. 42 Healthcare providers in Belarussian maternity hospitals and clinics randomized to the intervention condition received an 18-hour lactation management training course that focused on methods to maintain lactation, promote exclusive and prolonged breastfeeding, and resolve common breastfeeding problems. Finally, Healthy Moms was a selective intervention that aimed to limit pregnancy weight gain to within 3% of randomization weight. The intervention was based on behavioral self-management principles and consisted of a combination of two individual dietary counseling sessions and 16 weekly group sessions for expecting mothers. 39 – 41 43 – 45 Intervention effects. Of the prenatal/infancy interventions, all four assessed weight-related outcomes and three assessed dietary outcomes. The three interventions classified as universal prevention reported significant between-group differences in either weight-related or dietary outcomes. Intervention mediators and moderators. None of the studies in this developmental stage tested for mediated or moderated effects of the intervention. Early Childhood (2–5 years) General study characteristics. We reviewed 11 distinct interventions reported across 20 published articles for the early childhood developmental stage. We classified seven of these as universal prevention, three as selective, and one as indicated. Sample sizes ranged from 57–731 participants, and most participants were in the normal weight range at baseline. Of the five studies that reported participant race and ethnicity, three had predominantly non-Hispanic White samples. Length of follow-up ranged from 6 months to 9.5 years. 46 – 65 Intervention characteristics. The duration and intensity of early childhood interventions ranged from a single 10-minue session to weekly sessions for six months. Eight of these 11 interventions were delivered exclusively at the family level. The seven universal early childhood interventions were grounded in either SCT or a social contextual framework. These interventions generally targeted parenting and behavioral constructs such as parental modeling of healthy behaviors and restructuring of the home environment to encourage healthy behaviors. The selective (n=3) and indicated (n=1) early childhood interventions were primarily grounded in a social contextual framework. Half of these interventions were delivered exclusively at the family level (with parents and children participating in some separate and some joint activities) and included components such as dietary counseling, structured physical activity sessions, and parent training (e.g., reinforcement, behavior management, changing family attitudes towards healthy lifestyle behaviors). Interventions delivered at schools included strategies for increasing active play and teacher-led nutrition education sessions. Intervention effects. Ten of the 11 interventions assessed multiple outcomes of interest for this review. Eight studies assessed weight-related outcomes, physical activity, and sedentary behavior, while nine assessed dietary outcomes. Two interventions reported significant between-group differences (in favor of the experimental condition) for weight-related outcomes, one for sedentary behavior, and eight for diet at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Six interventions had null effects (i.e., those coded with a “0” across all assessment time points) on weight-related and sedentary behavior outcomes, and one on dietary outcomes. All of the interventions that assessed physical activity reported null effects. Of the seven early childhood interventions classified as universal, six reported significant between-group differences in diet at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Of the four selective and indicated early childhood interventions, two reported no significant between-group differences in any of the outcomes assessed; the other two reported significant between-group differences in child diet and one other outcome (either weight-related or sedentary behavior). Intervention mediators and moderators. Two studies in this developmental stage reported formally testing for mediation effects and one tested for both mediation and moderation effects (referred to as either “Med✓” and/or “Mod✓” in Table 3 ). In the Healthy Habits study, a telephone-based intervention targeting the home food environment in preschoolers, child access to junk food (e.g., sugary snacks and beverages) in the home and parents’ use of restrictive child feeding strategies independently mediated the effects of the intervention on child junk food intake at the 2-month follow-up. Similarly, parent fruit and vegetable intake and provision of these foods at both 2- and 12-month follow-ups were significant mediators of this intervention on child fruit and vegetable intake. 51 The EMPOWER intervention assessed maternal-facilitated constructs of SCT including environment, emotional coping, expectations, self-control, and self-efficacy. A home environment conducive to healthy nutritional choices was found to significantly predict 13% of the change in child fruit and vegetable intake from baseline to follow-up. 55 Key mediators in the Family Check-Up were parents’ use of positive behavior support strategies and nutritional quality of meals served at home. Moderators examined in this study included child race/ethnicity, geographic region, and poverty status; however, none of these were found to be significant. 59 Childhood (6–11 years) General study characteristics. We reviewed 38 distinct interventions across 69 published articles for the childhood developmental stage. We classified 37% of these as universal prevention, 26% as selective, and the remaining 37% as indicated. Sample sizes ranged from 30–2,350 participants. Fifty percent of the studies reported information regarding participant race and ethnicity; of those, 12 consisted of predominantly non-Hispanic White samples (45%−97%). Length of follow-up ranged from 6 months to 7 years. 66 – 134 Intervention characteristics. The duration of interventions in the childhood stage ranged from four weeks to three years. Fifty-eight percent of these interventions were delivered at the family level, 29% at the school-level, and the rest used a combination of family, school, and community-based approaches. Of the 14 interventions classified as universal prevention, seven were grounded in SCT alone or in combination with other theories (e.g., self-efficacy theory, socio-ecological model, Theory of Planned Behavior). These interventions were largely conducted in school settings (n = 10) and delivered primarily by teachers or school staff. Key intervention components included teacher trainings, school curriculum changes (e.g., revised lesson plans to include content on healthy lifestyle behaviors, changes to the structure of PE classes), and limited parental participation (e.g., newsletters with information and parenting tips, health booklets, brochures, parent information sessions). Other universal interventions targeting this developmental stage were conducted on school grounds during after school care. Unlike the universal interventions, the majority of the 24 studies classified as selective or indicated prevention of obesity during childhood were conducted exclusively at the family level (n = 19) or at the family level in combination with either school- or community-based approaches (n = 4). Selective interventions used a wide range of theoretical frameworks (e.g., SCT, Transtheoretical Model, Health Belief Model) and intervention approaches (e.g., motivational interviewing, positive parenting group sessions, behavior modification training during school lessons) while indicated studies were largely grounded in Behavioral Choice Theory (n = 8) and applied family-based behavioral treatment (FBT). Standard FBT involves a combination of weekly weigh-ins, individual therapy, and separate parent and child group meetings covering principles of weight control, the Traffic Light Diet, behavioral skills (e.g., self-monitoring, goal-setting) and positive parenting skills (e.g., praise). Notably, the majority of the FBT studies (6 of 8) met the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation 96 of having at least 26 intervention contact hours for obese 6–18 year olds. 135 Intervention effects. Sixty-three percent of studies assessed multiple outcomes of interest for this review whereas the remaining 37% assessed only one. Eighty-two percent assessed weight-related outcomes, 58% assessed physical activity, 37% assessed sedentary behavior, and 58% assessed dietary outcomes. Of those that assessed each outcome, 42% reported significant between-group differences (in favor of the experimental condition) for weight-related outcomes, 45% for physical activity, 36% for sedentary behavior, and 55% for diet. Forty-eight percent had null effects on weight-related outcomes, 50% on physical activity, 57% on sedentary behavior, and 37% on diet. Of the 14 childhood interventions classified as targeting universal prevention, nine assessed weight-related outcomes, eight assessed physical activity, four assessed sedentary behavior, and five assessed dietary outcomes. Half reported positive significant between group differences in at least one of the outcomes of interest at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Four studies reported significant between-group differences (in favor of the experimental condition) for weight-related and physical activity outcomes, three for sedentary behavior, and three for diet. Of the 24 selective and indicated childhood interventions, 21 assessed weight-related outcomes, 14 assessed physical activity, 10 assessed sedentary behavior, and 16 assessed dietary outcomes. Sixty-three percent reported positive significant between group differences in at least one of the outcomes of interest at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Nine studies reported significant between-group differences (in favor of the experimental condition) for weight-related outcomes, six for physical activity, two for sedentary behavior, and nine for diet. Studies evaluating FBT generally showed no significant between-group differences across outcomes. Importantly, however, most of these studies compared variations of FBT (e.g., parent + child problem solving vs. child only problem solving) that showed equivalent effects across intervention and comparison conditions. Intervention mediators and moderators. Thirteen percent of studies in this developmental stage tested mediation effects, 13% did not formally test for mediation but reported the effects of the intervention on theoretically relevant constructs (referred to as “Med as Outcome” in Table 3 ), and 39% of studies tested moderation effects. Significant mediators included parenting (e.g., limit-setting, monitoring, reinforcement, support, modeling), child psychosocial (i.e., knowledge, self-regulation), 73 , 93 or child behavioral variables (i.e., non-organized physical activity, dessert intake). 71 , 72 The Youth Fit 4 Life intervention, for example, found that together, changes in self-regulation for physical activity, mood, and self-efficacy significantly mediated the effects of the intervention on BMI at both three and nine months. 90 Importantly, change in self-regulation for physical activity was a significant independent mediator in this study. 72 Child gender was the most widely examined moderator in this developmental stage, with four of seven studies reporting differential intervention effects for boys vs. girls, generally finding stronger effects for boys. Other significant moderators included parent (e.g., education, support) 77 , 99 , 123 , 130 and child variables at baseline (e.g., pubertal onset, grade, social problems, race), 116 , 118 and built environment characteristics. 84 , 85 , 103 , 113 In FBT interventions, greater proximity to parks and less access to convenience stores and supermarkets were associated with greater reductions in child zBMI. 101 101 Early-to-Mid Adolescence (12–15 years) General study characteristics. We reviewed 18 distinct interventions reported across 34 published articles for the early-to mid-adolescence developmental stage. We classified 44% of these as universal prevention, 22% as selective, and 33% as indicated. Sample sizes ranged from 55–3,110 participants, with the majority falling within the normal weight range at baseline. Of the 14 studies that reported participant race and ethnicity, six had predominantly non-Hispanic White samples. Length of follow-up ranged from 6 months to 2 years. 136 – 169 Intervention characteristics. The duration of early- to mid-adolescent interventions ranged from four weeks to one year. Forty-four percent of these interventions were delivered at the individual level in combination with family, school, or community-based approaches, 39% were delivered exclusively at the school-level, and the rest at the family or family and school levels. Of the eight interventions classified as universal prevention, half were grounded in SCT or social learning theory. The majority of these interventions were conducted in school settings (n = 6) and primarily involved changes to the school curriculum (e.g., PE courses on energy balance topics), physical environment (e.g., offering healthier products and smaller portions in the school cafeteria, remodeled outdoor spaces) and health-related policies (e.g., restricting access to vending machines, mandatory recess). The 10 studies classified as selective and indicated prevention for early-to mid-adolescents were largely focused on the individual youth participant in combination with family and community-based strategies. Four of these 10 studies met the minimum USPSTF 26 intervention contact hours. The selective prevention studies were primarily grounded in SCT whereas most (n = 4) indicated studies did not report a specific theoretical framework. Half the studies used motivational interviewing strategies to engage youth or their parents in the behavior change process, and the majority were delivered by trained interventionists. Intervention effects. Sixty-one percent of the 18 studies assessed multiple outcomes of interest for this review while the remaining 39% assessed only one. Eighty-eight percent assessed weight-related outcomes, 61% assessed physical activity, 39% assessed sedentary behavior, and 50% assessed dietary outcomes. Of those that assessed each outcome, 56% reported significant between-group differences (in favor of the experimental condition) for weight-related outcomes, 55% for physical activity, 86% for sedentary behavior, and 89% for diet. Forty-four percent had null effects on weight-related outcomes, 45% on physical activity, 14% on sedentary behavior, and 11% on diet. Of the eight universal early-to-mid adolescence interventions, six assessed weight-related outcomes, six assessed physical activity, three assessed sedentary behavior, and four assessed dietary outcomes. Six of the eight of the early-to mid-adolescence interventions classified as universal prevention reported positive significant between group differences in at least two of the outcomes of interest at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Of the 10 selective and indicated early-to –mid adolescence interventions, all 10 assessed weight-related outcomes, five assessed physical activity, four assessed sedentary behavior, and five assessed dietary outcomes. Six reported positive significant between group differences in at least one of the outcomes of interest at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Five studies reported significant between-group differences (in favor of the experimental condition) for weight-related outcomes, one for physical activity, three for sedentary behavior, and four for diet. Although half the selective or indicated interventions in this developmental stage assessed physical activity, Challenge! was the sole study to report positive significant between group effects for this outcome, but only when adolescent weight status was examined as a moderator. The selective and indicated studies in this developmental stage were more likely to improve weight-related and dietary outcomes. 136 Intervention mediators and moderators. Twenty-two percent of studies tested mediation effects, 22% did not formally test for mediation but reported the effects of the intervention on theoretically relevant variables that could be tested as mediators, and 38% of studies tested moderation effects. Significant mediators included adolescent psychosocial (autonomous motivation) and behavioral variables (healthy food intake, sugar intake). 156 Significant moderators included adolescent gender 149 , 168 , BMI, 162 , 169 ethnicity, 136 school level (middle vs. high school), 149 self-concept 168 and family functioning (e.g., problem solving, communication). 166 166 Late Adolescence (16–18 years) General Study Characteristics. We reviewed three interventions for the late adolescence developmental stage. We classified one of these as universal prevention and two of these as selective prevention, with sample sizes ranging from 253–1,800. All three studies had predominantly White samples in the normal weight range. Length of follow-up was one to two years. 170 – 174 Intervention characteristics. The duration of late adolescence interventions ranged from eight weeks to six months. The universal intervention was grounded in TTM and conducted in the school setting. This intervention, Health in Motion, relied solely on interactive technology to provide individually-tailored messages to high school students regarding their energy balance behaviors. 174 The two selective interventions were grounded in SCT alone or in combination with an ecological framework. These interventions were conducted in school settings. BALANCE was delivered by parent educators and targeted the intrapersonal environment of the teen (e.g., knowledge of high-risk patterns), interpersonal interactions among teen parents (e.g., group problem solving activities), and the physical environment (e.g. improving school, home). Healthy Habits, Healthy Girls – Brazil was a multi-component school-based intervention that included enhanced physical education and other school activities (e.g., nutrition workshops). 170 171 – 173 Intervention effects. Of the late adolescence interventions, only the two classified as selective prevention assessed weight-related outcomes, and all three assessed physical activity, sedentary behavior, and dietary outcomes. Two interventions reported significant between-group differences in either physical activity, sedentary behavior or dietary outcomes at one or more of the post-intervention and follow-up assessment time points. Intervention mediators and moderators. None of the studies in this developmental stage tested for mediation or moderation effects of the intervention. One study reported the effects of the intervention on a theoretically relevant construct (i.e., stages of change) and found that those in the intervention condition were more likely to remain in the action and maintenance stages of change for physical activity and television viewing than were those in the comparison condition. 174 Risk of Bias Our risk of bias assessment is summarized in Figure 3 (overall) and as a supplement Table 4 (for individual interventions). Discussion Following Smith et al.’s conceptual DC model of pediatric obesity, the goals of this systematic review were to identify and describe pediatric obesity prevention interventions from infancy to late adolescence and to provide recommendations for future intervention research in light of the DC model. We identified a total of 74 distinct interventions, tested in RCTs, that examined immediate and sustained effects on youth weight status, physical activity, sedentary behavior, and/or diet. Only four and 11 of the 74 identified interventions were conducted in the prenatal/infancy and early childhood stages, respectively. The remaining 38 and 21 RCTs were evaluated with children and adolescents, respectively. Interventions in the prenatal/infancy and early childhood stages targeted universal samples, were delivered at the family level, and most often targeted mothers’ early feeding practices and positive parenting skills. Relative to their respective comparison conditions, these interventions were more likely to improve child dietary outcomes than they were to improve child weight status, physical activity, or sedentary behavior. In the childhood and adolescence stages, over half of the interventions targeted selective or indicated samples; these interventions tended to involve the family for intensive lifestyle modification. Interventions in childhood and adolescence that targeted universal samples were largely school-based and involved school curriculum changes. Results of these studies were generally mixed, with observed immediate effects on outcomes usually wearing off by follow-up assessments. Of the 74 interventions, only 16% tested for mediation effects and just under a third (31%) tested for moderation effects. Findings from this review provide important insights regarding strengths and gaps of the current literature. For example, while existing interventions seem to include some developmentally relevant constructs (e.g., parent feeding practices), others known to be associated with obesity and related behaviors are largely missing (e.g., family functioning, positive behavior support). We discuss our key findings below, organizing them into general and developmentally-specific recommendations for pediatric obesity prevention. 18 General Recommendations for Pediatric Obesity Prevention Research Focus on holistic and ongoing interventions that begin early in life. As outlined by Smith et al., four core tenets have emerged from previous empirical DC models regarding interactions between multiple risk and protective factors: (1) change at one point in the cascade leads to downstream effects later on; (2) between early childhood and early adolescence, there is generally stability in child behaviors and ecological influences; (3) while individual risk factors have small effects, the accumulation of small effects over time is large; and (4) early influences are important, not because their effects are necessarily larger than later effects, but because they trigger cascading effects. These tenets point to the critical role of early influences on later outcomes. Despite the DC model’s emphasis on early influences and the potential for early intervention to disrupt negative cascades, only 5% and 15% of the included preventive interventions targeted the prenatal/infancy and early childhood developmental stages, respectively. Notably, and despite the low number of studies in these developmental stages, 73% reported significant effects on one or more of our outcomes of interest at either the post-intervention or follow-up assessment time points. Previously published systematic reviews examining interventions for pediatric obesity prevention from birth to 18 years of age have shown that the number of prevention trials in children younger than five years old is somewhat limited, with the majority of preventive interventions generally targeted towards children 6–12 years of age. 18 This is likely due to the larger burden of disease during childhood and adolescence as compared to early childhood. In a more recent review of obesity prevention studies with 0–17 year olds that were exclusively family-based, the 2–5 year old age range was well-represented (by 43% of the 119 included studies), potentially representing a shift in focus to family-based prevention at earlier stages. That said, a major gap in interventions targeting the prenatal period was highlighted (with only 8% of their included studies). 175 , 176 Overall, findings from our review are consistent with these studies and call for an increase in prenatal/infancy and early childhood obesity prevention efforts. They also point to the need for ongoing interventions delivered in schools or to families as children grow. 177 Assess long-term intervention effects. Following our recommendation to focus on early prevention is the need to assess the long-term impact of preventive interventions, particularly those that show promise in the shorter term. Only seven of the 74 (9%) included interventions had a follow-up period greater than or equal to five years, only one of which was greater than 10 years. Twenty percent had less than one-year follow-up, 43% had greater than one year but less than two years, and 27% had between 2–5 years follow-up. Further highlighting the overwhelming lack of long-term intervention follow-up in the field is the additional 457 studies that would have been eligible for inclusion in our review ( Figure 2 ) had it not been for our imposed 6-month post-intervention follow-up minimum criteria. Although DC models suggest preventive interventions may be critical for disrupting negative cascades, these potential protective effects go undetected unless participants are followed over long periods, particularly for earlier interventions. Lack of follow-up may be due to lack of intervention success over the short and long term, participant attrition, and limited funding. We recommend that future research examine optimal lengths of follow-up based on the developmental stage of intervention initiation and expected time for change to occur and be sustained. 178 We also recognize that there are practical challenges associated with long-term follow up that are outside the control of individual researchers and may require changes in broader funding practices and policies. For example, the funding cap for R01 grants from the National Institutes of Health has been $500,000 of annual direct costs for at least the last 20 years. Given corresponding increases in inflation over this time, researchers today would need over $730,000 of annual direct costs to do the same work they did in the year 2000. Understandably, interventionists today face challenging budgetary decisions forcing them to sacrifice additional assessment time points. We encourage funding agencies to reexamine their policies and the effects they might have on understanding the impact of prevention studies. 179 Identify specific behavior change techniques used within interventions. The majority of studies (~80%) in our review referenced an overarching theoretical framework that informed intervention content and strategies. These theories were largely behavioral in nature (e.g., Social Cognitive Theory, Social Learning Theory, Behavioral Choice Theory). While we were able to extract information on general behavioral strategies used across interventions (e.g., problem solving around diet issues), we found that intervention descriptions were often not detailed enough to systematically identify specific strategies (e.g., problem solving barriers to a healthy diet vs. problem solving solutions for promoting a healthy diet) or the time spent discussing these strategies. This limited our ability to understand what exactly was done during intervention sessions and make systematic comparisons across studies, which is critical for determining why some interventions work while others do not. More recent interventions in the field have begun to apply the Behavior Change Technique Taxonomy, or a set of 93 standardized definitions of behavioral strategies, to their pediatric obesity prevention interventions as a way to describe the unique behavior change techniques applied across sessions. 180 We strongly recommend that all interventionists do the same moving forward. 181 , 182 Assess underlying mechanisms of action and intervention moderators. One of the primary implications of DC models for prevention science is that well-timed interventions that target underlying mechanisms of action stand to have the greatest impact. While over 80% of the interventions included in our review referenced an overarching theoretical framework, less than a fifth conducted corresponding mediation analyses used to evaluate underlying mechanisms of action (i.e., 20% of the early childhood interventions, 13% of the childhood interventions, and 19% of the adolescence interventions). The DC model of pediatric obesity suggests that any of the constructs shown in bold in Figure 1 , including developmentally-specific risk and protective factors, amplifying factors, and family management practices, could potentially be examined as intervention mediators with obesity/weight status as the outcome. Notably, the few times mediators were examined across interventions, we found that they were generally consistent with the DC model (e.g., parental limit setting, child temperament, child physical activity). O’Rourke and MacKinnon encourage prevention researchers to test for mediation, even in the absence of significant intervention effects. These authors present situations where there is increased power to detect a mediated effect over a direct intervention effect (e.g., when the mediated effect and the total effect are equal in a sample, when the mediated and direct effects have opposite signs). Moreover, they describe conceptual reasons for testing mediation in the absence of intervention effects, highlighting in particular the differences between action theory, or the theory relating interventions to mediators, and conceptual theory, or the theory relating mediators to outcomes. Mediation analyses provide a way to examine whether interventions changed the underlying constructs they were designed to change (action theory) and/or whether these mediators were in turn related to target outcomes (conceptual theory). Notably, 14% of studies in our review examined action theory only by reporting effects of the intervention on mediating variables. Without a comprehensive understanding of both action and conceptual theory, however, it is difficult to assess how interventions work (or potential reasons they fail to work). Overall, our ability to design more efficacious and effective interventions is contingent on furthering our understanding of change processes. We thus urge interventionists to conduct and report mediation analyses even when direct intervention effects on the primary and secondary outcomes are null. Given mediated effects may not be constant across different groups of individuals receiving an intervention, we also encourage interventionists to consider moderated mediation. 183 184 With regard to moderation, approximately a third of studies in our review reported these analyses. Although child gender was the most widely examined moderator, it was only examined as a moderator in 14% of the included studies. Smith et al. highlighted child gender as a moderator in the DC model of pediatric obesity based on a review of over 300 longitudinal, weight-related studies, many of which found gender differences in the relationships between variables or the developmental processes under investigation. The same processes occur in longitudinal intervention studies. As such, we recommend that gender be examined more routinely as a moderator of intervention effects and both significant and null effects be reported. If gender is found to moderate intervention effects, we recommend that interventionists explore reasons why their intervention may have differential effects on boys vs. girls. Target parenting and family management across development. The DC model of pediatric obesity places parenting and family management practices below developmentally-specific risk and protective factors to emphasize their relevance across development. The level of family involvement across interventions decreased from the prenatal/infancy stages through late adolescence. Whereas families were involved in nearly every intervention in the prenatal/infancy and early childhood stages, this was not the case in childhood and adolescence. This pattern is consistent with children’s increasing autonomy and the relevance of other systems (e.g., schools, peers) as they grow. Notably, during childhood and adolescence, interventions classified as selective and indicated vs. universal prevention were primarily delivered at the family level, signaling the recognized need to involve families when youth are at increased risk of obesity. Even when interventions are school or community-based, and parenting and family management is not explicitly targeted, these constructs should still be assessed and evaluated as moderators of intervention effects given the connection between familial constructs and weight and the potential that not addressing familial factors will negate the influences of other contexts. There is also the possibility of improving child behavior through improving parenting and vice versa due to bidirectional relationships between parenting and child eating and weight. 185 186 With regard to specific parenting and family management practices, Smith et al. identified parenting styles, feeding styles, family functioning, relationship quality, and support as robust family-related predictors of pediatric obesity. Findings from our review suggest that a strength of current interventions, particularly those in earlier developmental stages, is that they often target feeding practices, such as responsive feeding, and parenting and family management skills related specifically to healthy eating, physical activity, and child growth. More general parenting and family constructs such as family functioning, or the quality and degree of family cohesion, parental involvement, positive parenting, and family communication, however, were not as well represented in our included studies. Power and colleagues 187 distinguish general parenting styles and practices (i.e., those that cut across childrearing situations and domains) from domain-specific parenting styles and practices (i.e., those that refer to parents’ behavior in specific contexts, e.g., feeding, physical activity) and note that the optimal combination of these within pediatric obesity interventions is not well understood. 188 Importantly, the DC model of pediatric obesity identifies child intrapersonal constructs (e.g., temperament, self-regulation, inhibitory control, self-esteem) as processes that may amplify obesity risk from one stage to the next. A recently proposed biopsychosocial model of the development of pediatric overweight and obesity overlaps with the DC model in that it highlights the contributions of child-level characteristics such as temperament and self-regulation of energy intake as influencing parent behaviors and practices. 188 Because these intrapersonal constructs have been previously shown to mediate associations between general positive parenting and other adverse child outcomes (e.g., externalizing behavior 189 ), it is important to target both general and domain-specific parenting within pediatric obesity prevention interventions across development. 190 Increase scientific equity in obesity prevention research. Findings from Smith et al. highlight race/ethnicity as an independent risk factor for obesity, with Hispanic, non-Hispanic Black, and American Indian youth at greatest risk for developing obesity. Sixty-two percent of the 29 USA-based studies that reported this information were conducted with largely non-Hispanic white samples, suggesting high risk populations may have limited access to these interventions. Prevention researchers have advocated for the need to increase “scientific equity,” or “equality and fairness in the amount of scientific knowledge produced to understand the potential solutions to such health disparities” (p. 642). We encourage interventionists to increase the number of participants from diverse racial and ethnic populations in their obesity prevention trials and consider using specific research paradigms for better understanding how interventions and the way they are implemented are related to scientific and health equity. 191 Given the majority of interventions conducted outside the USA in this review (62%) failed to report participant race/ethnicity, we also recommend that this information be collected and reported more consistently across studies. 192 Developmentally-Specific Recommendations for Obesity Prevention Prenatal/infancy. The DC model of pediatric obesity identifies maternal health as a key risk factor during the prenatal/infancy stage. Indeed, pre-pregnancy maternal weight and gestational weight gain have been identified as key modifiable risk factors for rapid weight gain trajectories in children. A strength of the four interventions we reviewed for this developmental stage is that mothers were the primary intervention recipients. Because our review was limited to interventions that reported effects on youth, we excluded prenatal studies that reported effects on mothers’ weight status and health behaviors only. It is possible that these interventions influence an infant’s weight status. As such, future interventions delivered prenatally should assess outcomes in both mothers and children postpartum. Otherwise, the impact of prenatal interventions on child health remains largely unknown. 193 The DC model additionally identifies adverse events/stress and temperament as processes that may amplify a child’s obesity risk as they move from the prenatal/infancy stage to early childhood. The provision of positive parenting skills at this developmental stage is especially important, as they have been shown to buffer against the negative effects of “difficult” temperament. Moreover, general positive parenting interventions have been shown to reduce adverse events (e.g., child maltreatment) and parental stress. 194 Only two of the four interventions included in our review during this developmental stage (NOURISH RCT, Baby Teeth Talk) noted that they covered positive parenting skills, thus we recommend that these skills be better integrated into interventions at this stage. 195 Early childhood. During early childhood, the DC model of pediatric obesity highlights nutrition and dietary intake as well as rapid weight gain and adiposity rebound as key risk factors for obesity. While physical activity and sedentary behavior were also risk factors in the model, Smith et al. note that the literature on physical activity and sedentary behavior in toddlers is limited compared to that conducted with children and adolescents, which would be expected based on development and measurement/assessment considerations. Consistent with these identified risk factors, interventions in this developmental stage reported the most success with improving child dietary outcomes. Although eight of the 11 early childhood interventions targeted physical activity, none of them reported significant between group differences. Researchers should devote more attention to understanding how to optimally measure and change physical activity in toddlers. Other notable strengths these interventions include their delivery at the family level, targeting domain-specific parenting constructs (e.g., restructuring the home environment), and simultaneously targeting multiple outcomes. As previously noted, an area for improvement at this developmental stage is targeting general parenting constructs that have been shown to positively impact child inhibitory control (e.g., positive behavior support). 18 196 Childhood. Unlike interventions at the earlier stages of development, the majority (63%) of childhood interventions were classified as selective or indicated prevention, suggesting that universal interventions, although necessary, are recognized as insufficient at this stage to disrupt further negative cascades. In this developmental stage, the prevention type largely dictated the intervention approach; whereas universal interventions were largely school-based, selective and indicated interventions were largely family-based. Our results indicate that a larger proportion of the selective and indicated vs. universal interventions reported positive significant between group differences in at least one outcome. These findings are consistent with another systematic review of child obesity prevention and treatment interventions that addressed parenting and found that all 10 of 16 studies with significant effects were delivered to children already in the overweight or obese weight range rather than to children from the full weight spectrum. 197 During childhood, the DC model of pediatric obesity highlights nutrition and dietary intake, physical activity and sedentary behavior, and sleep as key risk factors for obesity. Based on our review, researchers are doing moderately well targeting these outcomes. Specifically, over half the interventions in this developmental stage successfully targeted and impacted multiple outcomes, namely weight, physical activity, and diet. Approximately a third of studies targeted changes in sedentary behavior and none of the interventions focused on improving sleep duration or quality. The DC model also identifies adverse events/stress, self-regulation and self-esteem as processes that amplify a child’s risk for obesity from childhood to early adolescence. However, only one intervention in this developmental stage assessed self-regulation, specifically, self-regulation for physical activity, and none assessed self-esteem. Based on the DC model, we recommend that studies in childhood should more frequently target and/or assess sedentary behavior, sleep, self-regulation (both general and domain-specific), and self-esteem. Early-to-Late adolescence. During adolescence, the DC model of pediatric obesity identifies nutrition and dietary intake and physical activity and sedentary behavior as key risk factors for obesity. As with childhood interventions, the prevention type during this stage largely dictated the intervention approach, with universal interventions being primarily school-based. Selective and indicated interventions, however, tended to focus on the individual youth participant in combination with family and community-based strategies. This represents a developmentally appropriate shift in responsibility to the adolescent while still maintaining the important role of the family and other supports. A notable strength of studies in this developmental stage was that the majority targeted multiple health behaviors, including diet, physical activity, and sedentary behavior. In fact, compared to all other developmental stages, interventions in early-to-mid adolescence were most likely to target and successfully reduce sedentary behavior. Still, less than half (39%) of interventions actually assessed sedentary behavior. Given documented increases in sedentary behavior during adolescence we recommend that future interventions continue to target this particular health behavior. 198 Limitations First, although we reported on the presence of significant between group effects, our system of classifying study effects did not account for study sample sizes or provide an indication of effect sizes—only the significance or lack thereof. Our intent from the outset, however, was not to conduct a meta-analysis but rather to simply provide a descriptive account of the current obesity prevention literature from infancy through late adolescence. Second, we limited our search to three commonly used databases (PubMed, PsycINFO, Scopus), which may have limited the breadth of articles included in our review. Finally, because of our imposed terms, search filters, and our minimum 6-month post-intervention follow-up criteria, we may have unintentionally excluded relevant interventions (e.g., longer interventions that only assessed outcomes at baseline and post-intervention, quasi-experimental or other intervention designs) that could have provided additional insights in relation to the DC model. Yet one of the biggest insights we gained by imposing the minimum 6-month post-intervention criterion was the need to increase intervention length of follow up. Despite these limitations, our search covered a span of over 20 years, is easily replicable (see Table 1 ), and is unique in that findings were organized using a DC model. Although not directly a limitation of this study, it is important to acknowledge existing gaps in the current DC model of pediatric obesity. These gaps are largely a reflection of the limitations of the longitudinal literature used to develop it, which fails to elucidate change processes due to being primarily epidemiologic in nature or not focused exclusively on understanding weight gain. Investigations of cascades in the obesity literature are still in their infancy and should aim to emulate the child problem behavior literature by moving past risk and protective factors to a greater understanding of mechanisms that contribute to obesity. To truly identify how cascades “work,” a bridge is needed between the developmental and intervention science literatures. We see the current review as providing a next step in the scientific process. As empirical examinations of cascades begin to emerge in the obesity literature, intervention scientists might also draw from other recent reviews examining pathways leading to pediatric obesity for suggested strategies to promote positive or disrupt negative cascades. 199 – 201 Conclusions Using the first conceptual DC model of pediatric obesity as an organizing framework, this review examined the current obesity prevention literature, highlighting areas of strength and necessary improvement both generally and across specific developmental stages from prenatal/infancy and late adolescence. Although studies generally seem to be targeting important developmentally-specific risk and protective factors (e.g., maternal health, dietary intake) and domain-specific parenting and family management practices (e.g., feeding practices), the amplifying factors (e.g., temperament, adverse events/stress, self-regulation) and more general parenting and family management practices (e.g., family functioning) identified in the DC model of pediatric obesity were not well represented in our included studies, nor were examinations of any of these variables as intervention mechanisms of action. Future preventive intervention efforts should draw on existing knowledge about influence processes and pathways leading to pediatric weight gain when designing preventive interventions and should systematically assess the processes that facilitate change over time. Overall, longitudinal intervention trials that commence at earlier stages of development and assess developmentally-relevant mechanisms of action are likely to have a large and long-standing public health impact. Supplementary Material