Introduction Cancer is common in older adults. In this second part of a two part review we address the prevention of cancers in organs associated with human reproduction. Cancer prevention is important for older adults to both avoid premature morality and also to avoid discomfort and disability associated with advanced cancer and cancer treatment. As discussed in Part 1, efforts to prevent cancer and identify early cancers in older adults need to take into consideration cancer epidemiology, the clinical significance of the cancer and the effectiveness, drawbacks and cost of cancer prevention and screening. It is important that clinicians have a clear understanding of the prognosis with and without cancer treatment when discussing cancer screening with older adults. ( 1 ) Overscreening, defined as the identification of cancers that will not results in premature mortality and will remain asymptomatic throughout the patient’s remaining life, should be avoided. ( 2 ) Breast Cancer Epidemiology & Clinical Significance Age has a significant impact on breast cancer risk. According to the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data base, the median age of those diagnosed with breast cancer is 62 years. Approximately 44% of new breast cancers occur in women 65 years of age or older. Figure 1 . ( 3 ) Current estimates are that the percentage of older women age 70–84 diagnosed with breast cancer will increase from 24% to 35%, between now and 2030. ( 4 ) A family history of breast cancer in a first degree relative remains a risk factor for breast cancer in women over 65 years of age. ( 5 ) Several genetic mutations are associated with increased breast cancer risk. ( 6 ) Though younger women with BRCA mutations are at the highest risk for developing breast cancer, women age 71–80 with BRCA mutations also have an elevated breast cancer incidence. ( 7 ) Women who carry a BRCA1 mutation have a cumulative risk for breast cancer of 72% by age 80 years; women who carry a BRCA2 mutation have a 69% cumulative risk, compared with a 12% lifetime risk in the general population. ( 7 ) Black women in the United States (US) have a higher breast cancer mortality than white non-Hispanic, Asian and Hispanic women. ( 8 ) Additional risk factors are listed in Table 1 . Primary Prevention Lifestyle Based on epidemiologic data that show an association between a healthy lifestyle and reduced breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women, older women should be encouraged to adopt lifestyle practices which not only reduce their risk of other significant health outcome, but also reduce their risk of breast cancer. ( 9 ) Interventions associated with reduced breast cancer risk include, reduced alcohol intake, weight reduction, and a higher level of physical activity. There are limited data to support the use of a specific diet as a means of preventing breast cancer in older women. ( 10 ) Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs) & Aromatase Inhibitors The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that clinicians consider prescribing risk-reducing medications, such as tamoxifen, raloxifene, or aromatase inhibitors, to women who are at increased risk for breast cancer and at low risk for adverse medication effects. Table 2 & 3 . ( 11 ) It is not clear at this time to what degree BRCA1 and BRCA2 status should be considered when deciding about the use of selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) or aromatase inhibitors for the primary prevention of breast cancer. SERMs are only effective in reducing risk for estrogen receptor positive breast cancer, which is more common with BRCA2 than BRCA1 . Tamoxifen and raloxifene have potentially serious side effects in older women including venous thromboembolism and endometrial cancer. Aromatase inhibitors can decrease bone density and cause joint discomfort. Hereditary Risk & Genetic Testing The USPSTF recommends that primary care clinicians assess women with a personal or family history of breast, ovarian, tubal, or peritoneal cancer, or those who have an ancestry associated with BRCA1/2 gene mutations with an appropriate brief familial risk assessment tool. Table 2 & 3 . ( 12 ) A number of tools are available to help patients and their healthcare providers estimate risk. Table 2 . ( 13 ) Women with a positive result on their risk assessment should receive genetic counseling and, if indicated after counseling, genetic testing. There are data which indicate that genetic testing adds little to mammography when screening for breast cancer in women over 60 years of age. ( 14 ) Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) Though HRT, either with estrogen alone or in combination with a progestational agent, increases breast cancer risk, the increase in risk is small and may be outweighed by intolerable menopausal symptoms, which for some older women can persist for many years. ( 15 ) Older women who used HRT many years ago have little residual increase in breast cancer risk. ( 16 ) HRT should not be used for women with specific contraindications, such as a personal history of breast cancer or a significant history of cardiovascular disease. We believe shared decision making is an appropriate approach to this difficult topic. ( 17 ) Screening Patient Self-Breast Examination & Healthcare Provider Breast Examination There is insufficient data to support the use of patient self-breast examination or healthcare provider breast examination as an effective means of screening for breast cancer in older women. Mammography Though there is strong evidence that screening with mammography in women between 50 and 69 years of age decreases breast cancer mortality, there is less compelling evidence that there is benefit for older women. ( 18 ) Few randomized trials to date have included women over 70 years of age. Observational data from retrospective cohort and case-control studies, provide conflicting results when assessing the impact of mammography on breast cancer mortality, with some women aged 70 years and older showing reduced breast cancer mortality and others not. ( 19 ) Older women and their healthcare providers should decide together when to stop doing mammograms. Though some recommendations still state an age at which mammography should be discontinued, a patient’s breast cancer risk, their life-expectancy and shared decision making are better determinants. The USPSTF and the the American Cancer Society (ACS) have recommendations regarding the use of mammography to detect early breast cancer. Table 2 & 3 . ( 20 , 21 ) Life expectancy calculator and decisional support tools such as ePrognosis can help providers and their older patients come to a shared decision about when to stop mammography. Table 2 . ( 22 ) For most older women for whom a mammogram is recommended, biennial testing is appropriate. Additional breast imaging modalities can be used to detect breast cancer, including tomosynthesis and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). ( 23 , 24 ) Though there is evidence that using these testing methods may provide additional benefit for women with dense breast tissue, older women are less likely to have dense breast tissue and there are no well established guidelines stating that they should be used routinely to detect breast cancer in older women. Risks Risks associated with breast cancer screening in older women includes false negative tests, false positive tests which may lead to unnecessary additional testing, biopsies, surgery and overdiagnosis; particularly for older women with a limited life expectancy. Prostate Cancer Epidemiology & Clinical Significance Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous malignancy among men 75 years of age and older in the US, with nearly 175,000 new cases and more than 30,000 deaths from prostate cancer anticipated in 2019. ( 25 ) Approximately 60% of identified prostate cancers occur in men 65 years of age and older. Figure 1 ( 3 ) Risk factors for prostate cancer include older age, African-American race, family history of prostate cancer, exposure to Agent Orange, and certain hereditary syndromes (e.g. BRCA1 / BRCA2 ). Though the incidence of prostate cancer is very high in men in their 80’s and 90’s, most of these men will die with and not from their prostate cancer. There is considerable variation in the rate of progression of prostate cancers. Primary Prevention 5-alpha Reductase Inhibitors 5-alpha reductase inhibitors (5-ARI), including both finasteride and dutasteride have been demonstrated to have a modest impact on the incidence of prostate cancer. ( 26 , 27 ) Though there is some concern that this class of medication may result in the occurrence of higher grade prostate cancers, overall these medications do not appear to have a meaningful impact on prostate cancer mortality. ( 28 , 29 ) 5-ARIs can cause sexual side effects, including decreased libido and erectile dysfunction. Additional side effects include loss of muscle mass, decreased bone density, increase in blood sugar and falls. The uncertain survival benefit and an unfavorable side effect profile has resulted in a consensus against the use of 5-ARIs to prevent prostate cancer for men at average risk. Lifestyle Selenium, Vitamin E, Vitamin D and multivitamins and have all been evaluated for their ability to prevent prostate cancer. ( 30 – 32 ) None have been demonstrated to make a significant difference. Screening Most prostate cancers identified by prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening are low grade and grow slowly. Randomized trial data indicate no difference in prostate cancer mortality at 10 years between active monitoring and treatment for men with low risk prostate cancers. ( 33 ) USPSTF and ACS recommendations regarding the use of PSA to screen for prostate cancer are outlined in Table 2 & 3 . ( 34 , 35 ) Choosing Wisely identifies PSA-screening in men older than 75 years as low value care. Table 2 . ( 36 ) Risks False positive PSA results that lead to invasive testing and treatment are common. Overdiagnosis is also common and is increasingly likely with increasing age. Yet many men over 75 years of age continue to have PSA screening ordered. ( 37 ) Cervical Cancer Epidemiology and Clinical Significance Though the incidence of cancer of the cervix has decreased by >50% in the past 30 years, both cervical cancer incidence and mortality remain high in older women. Approximately 21% of identified cases of cervical cancer in the US occur in women 65 years of age and older. Figure 1 . ( 3 ) In the US, women aged 70 years and older have higher cervical cancer mortality than younger women. ( 38 ) Cervical cancer screening decreases both the incidence of cancer of the cervix and associated mortality, with a higher overall impact for older women compared to younger women. ( 39 ) Most cases are diagnosed in older women who have not been adequately screened. ( 40 ) Low income older women are at high risk for being inadequately screened for cancer of the cervix. Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) is a risk factor for cancer of the cervix. Primary Prevention Human Papilloma Vaccine (HPV) Though HPV vaccination is recommended for younger women, there are currently no recommendations that older women should be given HPV vaccine. It remains to be seen what the impact of the widespread HPV vaccination of young women and high risk young men will be on the incidence of cancer of the cervix for older women in the future. ( 41 ) Screening Cytology and HPV testing Most current recommendations for cervical cancer screening do not apply to women 65 years of age and older. USPSTF and ACS recommendations are outlined in Table 2 & 3 . ( 42 , 43 ) Though not reflected in current recommendations, there are data which suggest that continued cytology screening up to age 75 years may lead to incremental decreases in cervical cancer risk in later life. ( 44 ) Older women who have a negative high-risk HPV test or co-test after the age of 55 years have a low risk for cervical cancer for the rest of their lives. ( 44 ) Screening recommendations may vary depending on prior or current history. ( 45 ) Risks. False positive test results may lead to unnecessary interventions, surgery and patient anxiety. Ovarian Cancer Epidemiology and Clinical Significance Unfortunately, ovarian cancer remains the deadliest gynecologic malignancy, mainly because 75% of women present with advanced stage disease at the time of diagnosis. Approximately 45% of identified cases of ovarian cancer occur in women 65 years of age and older. Figure. 1 . ( 3 ) Women with a known mutation in either the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene are at an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer, with a lifetime risk of 46% and 27% respectively, with the risk increasing after age 40 for those with a BRCA1 mutation and after age 50 for BRCA2 . ( 46 ) No specific dietary factors are consistently associated with ovarian cancer risk. Primary Prevention Hereditary Risk & Genetic Testing The USPSTF recommend that primary care clinicians assess women with a personal or family history of breast, ovarian, tubal, or peritoneal cancer or those who have an ancestry associated with BRCA1/2 gene mutations, with an appropriate brief familial risk assessment tool. Table 2 & 3 . ( 12 ) Women with a positive result on the risk assessment should receive genetic counseling and, if indicated after counseling, genetic testing. The Society of Gynecologic Oncology also has guidelines to help providers decide who qualifies for testing for a germline BRCA mutation. Table 2 ( 47 ) Some women with either the BRCA 1 or BRCA 2 mutation may benefit from risk reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. ( 48 ) The applicability of this approach for women 65 years of age and older is not clear. Screening Neither the USPSTF nor the ACS recommend screening for ovarian cancer in asymptomatic women by any method, including a pelvic examination, cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) testing and transvaginal ultrasound. Table 3 . ( 49 , 50 ) Risks Risks from inappropriate screening include anxiety regarding test results, unnecessary surgery and associated complications. Endometrial Cancer Epidemiology and Clinical Significance Most cancers of the uterus occur in the endometrium. Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy, with a mean age at diagnosis of 63 years. ( 51 ) Approximately 45% of identified cases of endometrial cancer occur in women 65 years of age and older. Figure 1 . ( 3 ) Given the presence of early symptoms (post-menopausal vaginal bleeding), approximately 75% of cases are diagnosed in stage I and have 5-year survival rates of 90%. ( 52 ) There are two different types of endometrial cancer – types I and II. Risk factors for endometrial cancer are listed in Table 4 . ( 53 , 54 ) Primary Prevention There is no evidence that the adoption of life-style changes have a meaningful impact on the incidence of endometrial cancer. For women with a uterus on HRT, the addition of progesterone has been shown to decrease the risk of endometrial cancer. ( 55 ) A prophylactic hysterectomy is an option for older women known to have Lynch syndrome. ( 56 ) Screening There is no evidence to support the screening of asymptomatic women, with the exception of those who have or are at increased risk of Lynch syndrome. These patients should be screened annually with an endometrial biopsy starting at age 35. ( 57 ) Risks Risks from inappropriate screening include anxiety regarding test results, unnecessary surgery and associated complications. Summary Cancer is common in older adults. It is important that healthcare providers educate their patients regarding their cancer risks and where appropriate recommend interventions to both prevent and screen for cancer. Interventions that have not been shown to provide benefit for older adults should be avoided. When there is uncertainty regarding whether an intervention is appropriate for a specific older patient, shared decision making is the best approach.