INTRODUCTION Sleep is a fundamental, basic need that is considered a critical component to maintaining optimal human health. General population data have associated poor sleep with elevated risk of important adverse health outcomes such as mortality, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, depression, and cognitive impairment ( 1 – 3 ). PWH have been noted to have a higher risk of a wide range of comorbidities, especially those commonly linked to poor sleep health. A PubMed search of ‘(HIV) AND (Sleep)’ identified a tripling of the annual publication rate on this topic over the past 10 years, from 42 publications in 2011 to 137 in 2021. This narrative review will include a select highlight of publications between 2020 and 2022, with a special focus on studies of sleep and comorbidities in PWH. This review includes data on sleep disorders (e.g. insomnia, sleep apnea) as well as sleep health. A full discussion of the difference between these two concepts is beyond the scope of this review, but in brief, many persons do not meet criteria for a sleep disorder, yet still report substantial dissatisfaction with sleep, irregular sleep, or insufficient sleep. Although research on sleep health lags behind that on sleep disorders, the ‘RU-SATED’ approach of assessing dimensions of sleep RegUlarity, Satisfaction, Alertness, Timing, Efficiency, and Duration is increasingly used and relates to health outcomes independent of sleep disorders.( 1 ) This approach is distinguished from common questionnaires such as the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) which emphasizes sleep disruption and although it includes one question on sleep duration and one question on alertness, was not designed to assess multiple dimensions of sleep health. PREVALENCE DATA Sleep assessments have been increasingly included in large HIV cohort studies and findings support a high prevalence of sleep disorders in PWH. In a Canadian cohort of women with HIV (n=1039), sleep disorders were reported by 22%, trailing only depression (32%), anxiety (30%), obesity (27%), and obstructive lung diseases (23%); sleep disorders were more prevalent than hypertension (17%) and diabetes (9%).( 4 ) Investigators in the UK used primary care and hospitalization data (n=2945 PWH and n=5890 controls).( 5 ) PWH demonstrated higher risk of baseline and incident sleep disorder diagnoses compared to controls (incident sleep disorders in 7% vs 4% over 5 years, respectively, p<0.001; adjusted odds ratio [OR] 1.76; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.42 to 2.20]). These studies did not report on specific sleep disorders, but other studies have provided more granular detail. Insomnia is one of the most common sleep disorders in the general population and PWH appear to have particularly high risk for insomnia. In the Pharmacokinetics and Clinical Observations in People Over Fifty (POPPY) 7-site cohort study of PWH (n=357) and controls of similar lifestyles (n=126) in England and Ireland, 21% of PWH met criteria for insomnia on the validated Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) questionnaire, compared to 5% of controls (adjusted OR 5.3; 95%CI: 2.2 to 12.9).( 6 ) Furthermore, insomnia was undiagnosed and untreated in over 70%. Two other studies of PWH in London (n=254)( 7 ) and Miami (n=103)( 8 ) reported that 22% and 35%, respectively, met ISI criteria for insomnia. A study in Indonesia (n=200 PWH) reported that 34% of PWH met ISI criteria for insomnia( 9 ), although this study used an ISI threshold of >10 points (specificity of 88% for insomnia) compared to ≥15 points (specificity of 98%)( 10 ) used in other studies cited here. Another very common sleep disorder is sleep apnea (SA). SA prevalence in PWH is unclear, with recent studies reporting widely divergent estimates ranging from 6% in the POPPY study (n=357) ( 6 ) to 75% in a single-center study (n=120) in San Diego( 11 ) to 59%−88% in the US Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS; n=466) depending on the SA definition used.( 12 ) These studies used different diagnostic methods (overnight oximetry, in-laboratory overnight polysomnography, home-based polysomnography), and body mass index was slightly lower in England/Ireland (25.4 kg/m 2 ) than in the US (27.7 and 27.2 kg/m 2 ), but such differences alone would seem insufficient to account for such large differences in SA prevalence. Another single-center study of PWH (n=54 men) in Taiwan reported SA in 63%, but only offered polysomnography to those with sleep complaints, of whom only 23% completed a sleep study.( 13 ) Due to potential selection/participation bias, the true prevalence of SA in this study population was not clear. Despite uncertainty about SA prevalence in PWH, most studies suggest that HIV does not increase the risk for SA. Compared to controls, HIV was not associated with higher SA prevalence in POPPY( 6 ), a study in Taiwan (n=44 PWH and n=126 historical controls)( 14 ), and a small study of hospitalized PWH in Cameroon (n=8 PWH and n=103 controls).( 15 ) Administrative data from Taiwan also suggested no difference in SA prevalence in PWH (n=13,552) versus controls (n=134,361).( 16 ) The exception was in the MACS, where compared to controls (n=370), PWH (n=466) had more sleep apnea using one definition of sleep apnea (OR 1.42; 95%CI: 1.05 to 1.94), but not another competing definition (OR 1.23; 95%CI: 0.82 to 1.81).( 12 ) Lastly, a US case:control study (n=17 PWH with SA and n=17 matched controls with normal sleep studies) demonstrated that physiologic traits leading to SA (e.g. airway collapsibility, ventilatory control, threshold for arousals from sleep) were no different between PWH and controls( 17 ); the screening portion of this study (n=120 PWH to find the SA cases and matched controls) also found that a commonly used SA screening questionnaire had similar sensitivity and specificity in PWH compared to prior studies in the general population.( 11 ) These emerging data suggest that sleep apnea screening, diagnosis, and treatment approaches may not require any special adaptation in PWH. Another commonly encountered sleep disorder is restless legs syndrome (RLS). RLS pathogenesis has components of abnormal central nervous system dopaminergic pathways and iron stores, leading to a strong urge to move the lower limbs and subsequent difficulty initiating sleep, distinct from insomnia. Due to concerns that neurologic effects of HIV might also impact RLS, validated RLS questionnaires were administered in both POPPY and MACS. RLS prevalence estimates in PWH were 13% and 9%, respectively( 6 , 18 ) and PWH did not demonstrate increased RLS risk compared to controls. Nevertheless, RLS was fairly common in both cohorts, but was diagnosed and treated in none of the POPPY participants and was associated with longer HIV duration in MACS. In contrast to data on sleep disorders, sleep health metrics in PWH have not been widely reported, although POPPY used questionnaires and actigraphy data to derive RU-SATED scores, and found that compared to controls, PWH had worse sleep health in the satisfaction, timing and duration dimensions.( 19 ) Other recent studies have added to the considerable prior literature about PSQI in PWH, but as mentioned above, PSQI does not fully capture sleep health dimensions. Nevertheless, PWH have a high prevalence of abnormal PSQI scores, with new data from low-to-middle income settings in Ethiopia (n=389; PSQI >5 in 58%( 20 ); n=336; PSQI >5 in 57%( 21 )) and Iran (n=298; PSQI >5 in 70%).( 22 ) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE Data from general population cohorts have consistently associated the presence of sleep disorders and poor sleep health with a higher risk of myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, and heart failure. Data from PWH are still emerging, but several new studies suggest similar associations in PWH, particularly with insomnia. In an analysis of clinical data from five US sites between 2005 – 2015 (n=12,448 PWH), those with bothersome insomnia symptoms had elevated risk of incident MI.( 23 ) Insomnia was assessed with a single non-validated question and 48% reported mildly to severely bothersome insomnia symptoms. MI events were adjudicated into Type I (e.g. plaque rupture) and Type II (e.g. demand ischemia) events, of which there were 267 MIs over a median of 4.4 years. Insomnia was not associated with incident Type I MI (hazard ratio [HR] 1.05; 95%CI: 0.76 to 1.45) but was associated with incident Type II MI (HR 1.65 (95%CI: 1.11 to 2.45). These results were consistent with a prior analysis of US Veterans Affairs data (n=3108 PWH) associating insomnia with subsequent MI, coronary revascularization, or stroke, although this association was present in only those reporting severe insomnia symptoms, and was not statistically significant in those with more mild insomnia symptoms.( 24 ) COGNITION Cognitive function has been one of the more commonly studied outcomes in recent studies of sleep in PWH. A study in France (n=96 PWH and n=96 controls) used 8–11 days of continuous wrist-worn actigraphy for automated software quantification of sleep metrics such as sleep latency (time from lying down in bed to sleep onset) and sleep efficiency (the percentage of time in bed spent sleeping).( 25 ) Prospective memory was assessed by the frequency with which study participants followed instructions to press an event marker button on the actigraphy device when initiating sleep and upon morning awakening. PWH and controls completed the memory task at similar rates. Better sleep latency and sleep efficiency were associated with better task completion in controls, but not in PWH. Another US study (n=52 PWH and n=32 controls), collected cognitive testing and 5–15 days of actigraphy data.( 26 ) Better cognition was associated with less sleep fragmentation and greater sleep efficiency and sleep time overall, but results were generally non-significant in the PWH stratum, with only sleep fragmentation associating with learning and recall cognitive domains and several other results just outside statistical significance thresholds. This lack of association in PWH could have been due to low statistical power, but the study ultimately did not demonstrate consistent associations between actigraph sleep measures and cognitive scores in PWH. Some might interpret these recent studies to mean that sleep does not affect cognition in PWH, but sleep is a complex process that usual actigraphy metrics (e.g. average sleep latency, efficiency, duration) may not fully capture. For example, a person whose sleep widely varies from 4 hours to 10 hours per night can have the same average sleep duration as someone who sleeps consistently 7 hours per night every night. POPPY actigraphy and cognitive test data were analyzed using traditional multivariable regression, along with four different machine learning approaches.( 19 ) Traditional regression demonstrated only weak associations between actigraphy and cognitive results, but machine learning approaches provided novel insights, both in PWH and controls. For example, partial least squares regression identified associations between worse cognition and greater variability in multiple actigraphy measures and later average sleep onset time. The modest sample size precluded validation of this approach and longitudinal data were lacking. A deeper discussion of machine learning approaches is beyond the scope of this review, but advanced data analytic techniques are likely to be important in future analyses of high-dimension data from actigraphy (and other emerging technologies) to address questions regarding the impact of sleep on cognition and other outcomes. Self-reported sleep symptoms often lack good correlation to actigraphy-based measures( 26 , 27 ), but symptoms and actigraphy capture different dimensions of sleep. Although POPPY found no association between RU-SATED sleep dimensions and cognitive test results( 19 ), other studies have demonstrated worse cognitive test results in PWH with self-reported daytime sleepiness (reported by 67% of n=562 PWH in UK Biobank data and 58% of n=562 matched controls)( 28 ) and worse subjective cognitive complaints in PWH with self-reported poor sleep satisfaction (reported by 62% of n=435 PWH in China), even after controlling for anxiety and fatigue symptoms.( 29 ) Newer methods of assessing sleep and cognition include ecological momentary analysis (EMA). EMA methods collect data within participants’ lived experiences and environments, with repeated measures (typically several times per day) using technologies such as smartphones for questionnaires and wearables for physiologic data. Such methods allow for repeated measurements, potentially with less recall bias and with more dynamic capture of daily fluctuations in symptoms (e.g. sleepiness) or outcomes (e.g. cognition) that can be missed when done at study visits. A single-center US study (n=59 PWH and n=35 controls) collected EMA data on sleep (daily symptoms and actigraphy for 14 days), cognition (subjective symptoms four times per day and once-daily objective cognitive testing via smartphone), mood, and pain.( 30 ) Results showed good correlation between subjective and objective total sleep time both in PWH and controls, demonstrating the potential benefits of this approach over traditional recall approaches, which have not demonstrated good correlation.( 27 ) Subjective and objective sleep were associated with subjective cognitive symptoms of forgetfulness and difficulty concentrating, but not objective cognitive test performance, although testing was restricted to only color-word interference and verbal learning. This was a small and short-term study but demonstrated the feasibility and potential value of EMA approaches to sleep and cognitive and other outcome assessments in PWH. DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY Recent publications continue to build upon the literature demonstrating that sleep disorders and sleep symptoms are associated with depression and anxiety in PWH. Two US studies (n=103 PWH ( 8 ) and n=120 PWH( 31 )) showed that higher scores on the insomnia ISI questionnaire were significantly associated with worse depressive symptoms, with one also reporting associations with worse health-related quality of life (HRQoL)( 8 ). Another study also associated insomnia with worse HRQoL in PWH( 6 ), but this study additionally performed pathway analysis, which suggested that the relationship between insomnia and poor HRQoL is mediated through depression. A study in Indonesia (n=200 PWH) found that an ISI score >10 was associated with both depressive and anxiety symptoms in univariable analysis, but with only anxiety symptoms in multivariable analysis (OR 1.14; 95%CI: 1.01 to 1.28).( 9 ) Conversely, a study in London (n=254 PWH) found that an ISI ≥15 was associated with both depressive and anxiety symptoms in univariable analysis, but only with depressive symptoms in multivariable analysis (OR 16.1; 95%CI 2.6 to 100.1).( 7 ) Data from MACS also showed an association between restless legs syndrome and depression in these men (OR 1.82; 95%CI: 1.05 to 3.15).( 18 ) The EMA study previously discussed also assessed mood and found that both subjective and objective sleep were associated with next-day depressive symptoms.( 30 ) Worse subjective sleep from PSQI questionnaires has also been associated with worse mental component scores of HRQoL in men in Japan (n=45 PWH)( 32 ), more depressive symptoms in Ethiopia (n=399 PWH)( 33 ), and more depressive and anxiety symptoms in women in the US (n=1583 PWH)( 34 ). Another study in Nigeria (n=406 PWH) showed no association between PSQI scores and depressive symptoms, but showed an association between short sleep duration (a component of RU-SATED sleep health dimensions) and depressive symptoms.( 35 ) PAIN Relationships between sleep and pain are well established in the general population, and most data suggest that sleep problems are a stronger driver of pain disorders than vice versa.( 36 ) Emerging data support a relationship between sleep and pain in PWH. Four studies have recently reported on relationships between insomnia ISI scores and pain. In a study in Indonesia (n=200 PWH), those with ISI scores >10 had increased risk of reporting pain (OR 1.17; 95%CI: 1.01 to 1.35).( 9 ) In POPPY, ISI scores ≥15 were associated with both regional (OR 2.04; 95%CI: 1.03 to 4.05) and widespread pain (OR 3.68; 95%CI: 1.62 to 8.36).( 37 ) Notably, actigraphy measures were not associated with pain. A US study (n=120 PWH) also found that those reporting any chronic pain had higher ISI scores than those without pain.( 31 ) Another recent publication of note enrolled exclusively PWH with chronic pain (n=91 PWH) and showed that those with more HIV stigma and chronic pain stigma reported higher ISI scores.( 38 ) Sequential mediation analyses showed that the relationships between both chronic pain stigma and HIV stigma with pain severity were mediated through depressive symptoms and insomnia symptoms, highlighting the complex relationships between HIV, stigma, depression, sleep, and pain. KNOWLEDGE GAPS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH Most studies included in this review were cross-sectional, limiting ability to conclusively determine if or how sleep disorders and sleep health directly contribute to comorbidities in PWH. More prospective studies are needed to provide higher-quality causal inference data. Where feasible, studies should broadly assess multiple dimensions of sleep, including objective physiologic measures and patient-reported perceptions of sleep health beyond PSQI scores. Newer data capture and analytic techniques such as EMA and machine learning have high potential to advance scientific understanding of these complex data. Additional studies outside the scope of this review have used other methods such as joint modeling ( 39 ) and network analyses ( 40 ) to provide novel insights regarding sleep in PWH. Clinical trials are also needed to understand how modulation of sleep in PWH might affect comorbidities. Several small, non-randomized trials without a comparison arm have shown that: 1) insomnia treatment improved ISI scores and daytime sleepiness (n=20 PWH)( 41 ), 2) an intensive lifestyle intervention in PWH with prediabetes (n=13 PWH) improved sleep efficiency and that higher variability in sleep duration was associated with worse glucose homeostasis( 42 ), and 3) a 24-week exercise intervention (n=28 PWH) did not improve sleep time or sleep efficiency or PSQI scores.( 43 ) Ultimately, larger randomized trials with control arms are needed to determine if sleep disturbances affect comorbidities in PWH. Randomized trials of insomnia treatment should be a high priority, given its high prevalence in PWH and its associations with comorbidities reviewed here. Insomnia has well-established treatments (e.g. cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia [CBT-I]), and trials are ongoing to test the efficacy of CBT-I compared to usual care specifically in PWH ( ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03390114 ; n=20) and the effect of CBT-I compared to education and sleep hygiene on blood biomarkers of inflammation in PWH ( ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04721067 ; target n=50). Larger insomnia intervention trials should ideally assess broad outcomes of relevance to PWH (e.g. depressive symptoms, cognitive function, pain, quality of life). CONCLUSIONS PWH have a high burden of sleep disorders and poor sleep health. Comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, cognition, depression, and pain are associated with sleep in PWH. Longitudinal collection of comprehensive sleep disorder and sleep health data are needed, along with randomized controlled trials of sleep interventions in PWH.