I. Introduction Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is one of the primary causes of dementia, contributing to 60–70% of the cases [ 1 ]. Alzheimer’s Disease International (ADI) reports that dementia is the seventh leading cause of mortality, and the number of dementia patients is projected to reach 152 million worldwide by 2050 [ 2 ]. The numbers signify the severity of a global epidemic waiting for countries. Therefore, there has been an ongoing effort to discover the underlying causes of AD to facilitate timely treatment planning that can slow its progress and save healthcare resources. Early prediction of AD for a Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) patient can enable preventive treatment planning that improves both the patient’s and caregiver’s life qualities. MCI is considered an intermediate stage with a risk of transitioning to AD in later stages of the disease [ 3 ]. Therefore, in recent years, the focus has shifted to detecting MCI patients with a high risk of conversion to AD [ 4 ]. For early prediction of MCI-to-AD conversion, patient data comprising biomarkers of neuropsychological tests and neuroimaging, such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) of the brain, are essential. Following up on the patient data is also imperative to extract the temporal progression patterns due to the neurodegenerative nature of AD. Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) models are essential to discover the implicit characteristics in MCI and AD patient data and the dynamics leading to the conversion between the progression stages [ 5 ]. Studies focusing on ML models to predict MCI and AD essentially use neuropsychological test results, MRI or PET images, or a combination of neuropsychological and neuroimaging data [ 5 ]. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are commonly preferred for classifying the neuroimaging data of MCI and AD patients. However, constructing a neuroimaging dataset is challenging and expensive [ 6 ], [ 7 ]. There are few databases, e.g., Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) [ 8 ], where temporal MRI images are publicly available. Therefore, most studies in the literature report results on a single dataset of a certain patient distribution. However, training reliable CNN models requires large-scale datasets with sufficient intra-class diversity. When the scale of neuroimaging datasets is insufficient, transfer learning methods could leverage pre-trained architectures to extract features from neuroimaging data [ 9 ]. However, transfer learning does not address the lack of patient variability. For this reason, neurophysiological tests are critical resources to follow up disease progression of MCI and AD patients since they are non-invasive and more accessible to administer regularly than neuroimaging. Neurophysiological test biomarkers constitute tabular data. AD prediction literature using tabular data often concentrates on selecting significant biomarkers and training traditional ML models using them [ 10 ]. Discovering the most relevant biomarkers contributing to the conversion from MCI to AD is crucial but insufficient. A model that is capable of predicting the future diagnosis is also essential. Longitudinal neurophysiological biomarkers of many patients with sufficient time steps are required to capture the temporal dependencies in their progression to AD. However, most patients in public datasets have few time steps that complicate modeling the disease progression temporarily. For this reason, approaches that can shed light on the future stages of the disease without depending on time series could unravel the potential of cross-sectional data. This study proposes a simple yet promising framework, named A dv P rog , to predict the disease progression of MCI patients to AD from tabular cross-sectional data. The A dv P rog elicits as much information as possible from a multilayer perceptron binary classifier trained with cross-sectional visit data annotated as MCI and AD. Training the progression prediction framework requires the diagnoses of only two consecutive visits, and only the current visit data is sufficient to predict the disease progression of a test MCI patient. The progression prediction framework employs the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) adversarial attack to measure the proximity of a patient to the decision boundary between the MCI and AD diagnoses. We hypothesize that the adversarial direction obtained for an MCI patient reveals the conversion direction. Thus, we could suspect a future conversion if a small step toward the AD direction is sufficient to flip the diagnosis of an MCI patient, indicating proximity to the decision boundary between MCI and AD. The A dv P rog significantly differs from the studies focusing on selecting biomarkers to train traditional ML models since the study mainly focuses on the framework where the reason behind the future diagnosis prediction lies upon the MCI patient’s subtype. Furthermore, in contrast to CNN-based early AD prediction models, the A dv P rog does not require large-scale neuroimaging datasets to to provide predictions for disease progression. Contributions of the paper are outlined below: To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first attempt to employ adversarial attacks to study the early prediction of MCI to AD conversion with a lightweight neural network. The A dv P rog can be trained with neurophysiological biomarkers when neuroimages are unavailable. The biomarkers of the current visit and the diagnoses of two consequent visits are sufficient to train the A dv P rog which does not require a sequence for inference. The A dv P rog is intuitively interpretable. The proximity of patient representation to the decision boundary explains the underlying reason for MCI-to-AD conversion. The proximity to the AD region in the input space implies some biomarker values being higher or lower than an average MCI patient. The change in the input due to an adversarial perturbation flipping the binary classifier’s prediction from MCI to AD suggests the underlying factors of conversion. Adversarial progression scores obtained with adversarial attacks denoting the proximity to the decision boundary are used to predict the next visit’s diagnosis and discover subtypes in the MCI and AD groups. Thus, A dv P rog suggests the patient’s position in the progression stages along with its early prediction. The proposed framework is evaluated using neurophysiological test biomarkers of two different patient distributions from ADNI [ 8 ], [ 11 ] and National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) [ 12 ]. The proposed framework provides promising prediction performance for MCI-to-AD conversion and subtyping. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews predictive models for MCI and AD, Section III introduces A dv P rog , Section IV presents experimental results, Section V provides conclusion and limitations. II. Related Work This section reviews the recent studies focusing on predicting the MCI-to-AD conversion and subtyping patients into stable and high-risk conversion groups. A. Predicting MCI-to-AD Conversion While some studies on predicting the MCI-to-AD conversion focus solely on medical imaging, some train the predictive models with various neurophysiological biomarkers. Traditional machine learning models are commonly preferred due to their simplicity and efficiency. Vrahatis et al. discussed that AD research often resorts to CNNs for segmentation and feature extraction, but classifiers such as gradient boosting tree and SVM are used for the final prediction due to the insufficient training set sizes to train complex models from scratch [ 13 ]. For instance, Pang et al. proposed to train SVM, logistic regression, and random forest classifiers with variables from NACC Uniform Data Set [ 10 ], [ 12 ]. The authors considered several transition categories, such as normal-to-MCI and MCI-to-AD transition within 2 or 3 years [ 10 ]. At the same time, Change and Brainerd supported logistic regression prediction with the latent factors obtained from exploratory factor analyses and confirmatory factor analyses [ 14 ]. The authors investigated the effect of latent factors from multiple and single modalities on the conversion. Wang et al. also predicted MCI’s progression to AD by training an SVM classifier with cortical morphological features extracted from the MRI images in ADNI [ 15 ]. On the other hand, Franciotti et al. compared the tree-based classifiers for MCI-to-AD conversion prediction due to their simplicity and interpretability and concluded that random forest performs the best when neurophysiological features are used [ 16 ]. Bucholc et al. [ 17 ] and Irfan [ 18 ] also suggested employing voting-based ensemble approaches. Some recent studies may also focus on composing MCI and AD patient cohorts from Electronic Health Records (EHR) databases not specifically curated for AD. For instance, Zhou et al. trained SVM and random forest with an EHR dataset for AD prediction [ 19 ]. While Jiao et al. trained an SVM classifier with EEG signals for early prediction of AD [ 20 ]. Due to their flexibility and success in other domains, deep models are also employed to predict AD progression. Nguyen et al. proposed a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model to forecast the diagnosis of a patient [ 21 ]. The authors used the multimodal biomarkers provided in TADPOLE [ 11 ] dataset and compared their results with SVM, logistic regression, and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network. Designing predictive models with medical imaging data, such as MRI, is also commonly studied in the literature. Bae et al. proposed to train a 3-dimensional CNN (3D-CNN) architecture with structural MRI images to predict MCI-to-AD conversion [ 22 ]. Since such architectures are highly complex, training them from scratch requires large-scale datasets that are hard to acquire in the medical domain. Therefore, the authors proposed transfer learning techniques to leverage pre-trained CNN architectures [ 22 ]. Kung et al. also utilized structural MRI images to predict the conversion [ 23 ]. However, a fully connected neural network is trained with neuroimage biomarkers extracted from a software [ 23 ]. On the other hand, Hu et al. considered longitudinal MRI images and proposed a transformer-based architecture to address the temporality of the problem [ 24 ]. However, the authors focused only on two time steps. Rahim et al. also focused on AD prediction by training an architecture of 3D-CNN and RNN with temporal MRI data [ 25 ]. Since deep architectures lack interpretability, the authors proposed a visual explainability of the MRI sequence. B. Patient Subtyping Disease progression is closely related to the patient subtyping [ 26 ], [ 27 ]. Subtyping is critical, especially for neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD [ 28 ]. In literature, subtyping techniques supported by machine learning models often pose the task as a clustering problem [ 29 ]. Satone et al. is one of the subtyping studies where the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) clustering algorithm is considered to group patients [ 30 ]. The authors divided patients’ disease progression rates into low, medium, and high subtypes using the variables provided in the ADNI database [ 30 ]. Subtyping can be performed for different purposes. For instance, Nezhadmoghadam et al. also preferred GMM for grouping the patients. However, the authors focused on discovering low, medium, and high-risk groups within the MCI patients, where the risk refers to the conversion to AD [ 31 ]. Alexander et al. also approached the subtyping problem as a clustering task, but they attempted to group patients using the k-means algorithm [ 32 ]. On the other hand, Chen et al., in their recent study, proposed affinity propagation clustering and Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies (BIRCH) algorithm for subtyping based on numerical variables obtained from MRI and PET scans in ADNI [ 33 ]. Since subtyping is an unsupervised learning problem, commonly encountered subtyping evaluation techniques include the Silhouette score for measuring the goodness of clustering, analysis of variance, and statistical tests, such as the chi-squared test and t-test, for inferring the statistical significance of the subtypes. However, supervised models are also used to model the subtyping task instead of approaching the subtyping with clustering algorithms. For instance, Kwak et al. trained a dense CNN architecture to discriminate MRI images belonging to AD and cognitively normal patients [ 34 ]. Based on the binary classifier’s predictions for the MCI patients, the MCI patients are assigned to low and high-risk conversion categories [ 34 ]. Finally, Romano et al. proposed a similar approach where a three-dimensional CNN (3D-CNN) is trained with MRI images to classify patients into MCI and AD [ 35 ]. The authors introduced a correlation between the subtypes and the Shapley values computed for the binary classifier’s output. On the other hand, this study proposes to leverage adversarial progression directions to discover subtypes in MCI and AD patient groups. Similar to Kwak et al. [ 34 ] and Romano et al. [ 35 ], the proposed subtyping approach relies on a binary classifier. However, we do not directly utilize the classifier’s predictions, but we harness a patient’s distance to the decision boundary measured in terms of the adversarial perturbation amount. Algorithm 1: A dv P rog : Adversarial Progression Framework. Input: Data: 𝒟 = x 1 , y 1 , … , x N , y N γ i n i t ε Output: Progression scores: S = s 1 , … , s N 1: MCI-AD classifier: f = T r a i n C l a s s i f i e r ( D ) 2: for i = 1 , . . . , N do 3: Classification loss: ℒ C E f x i ; θ , y i 4: Initial γ = γ i n i t 5: for t = 1 , . . . , T do 6: x ˆ i t = x i + γ s i g n ∇ x i ℒ C E f x i ; θ , y i 7: if f x ˆ i t ≠ y i then 8: s i = t 9: break 10: end if 11: γ + = ε 12: end for 13: end for Most recent studies in this section are concerned with training simple but effective classifiers, such as logistic regression, SVM, random forest, and gradient boosting trees, using the best biomarkers to model AD progression or complex deep architectures with MRI images. One of the prominent challenges in this field is the lack of benchmark datasets [ 13 ]. The studies above report their performance on biomarkers of their choice and training and test splits they construct, although the data source comes from the same public databases. Therefore, directly comparing the performances reported in the literature and the proposed study would not be fair. For this reason, we compare the proposed framework’s performance by training the baseline models commonly used in the literature with our training splits. While most studies focus on the choice of biomarkers, this study addresses the early prediction of AD and the analysis of MCI and AD subtypes in one framework. The proposed study aims to design a model that does not require large-scale temporal neuroimaging and neurophysiological data. The purpose of the proposed framework is not to outperform complex deep models. On the other hand, the proposed approach aims to provide more insights into the underlying reasons behind a conversion prediction. III. Adversarial Progression Framework The proposed A dv P rog is outlined in Algorithm 1 and Fig. 1 . A dv P rog assumes that the binary classifier is trained on a dataset of a balanced number of MCI and AD visit samples. Although temporal data of patients are not required to train the binary classifier, patients with at least one labeled future visit are considered during training so that the prediction performance of the proposed framework can be evaluated. A. Problem Definition This study aims to address three scenarios to assist a physician in predicting the diagnoses of an MCI patient. Scenario 1: The first step is diagnosing a visit that might be the patient’s first or subsequent visit after a while. In this scenario, we need a model that does not need patient history to make a diagnostic decision. Thus, a prediction should be obtained only considering the current visit’s data. Scenario 2: If the patient of interest is diagnosed with MCI, the imminent risk of converting to AD should be investigated. For this purpose, monitoring brain atrophy with MRI and beta-amyloid accumulation in the brain with PET is essential [ 36 ]. However, we cannot expect to have MRI and PET data of a patient at each visit due to limited resources. In such cases, a physician might consider repeating the patient’s MRI or PET only if a risk for conversion is detected using the neurophysiological biomarkers. Therefore, the risk of MCI-to-AD conversion should be detected. Scenario 3: It is crucial to investigate the stage of the disease progression. From MCI to dementia, several disease progression stages are introduced in the literature. A patient might be in one of the MCI, mild, mild to moderate, moderate, severe dementia stages [ 37 ]. During the diagnosis, it is not straightforward to determine the stage due to the differences in individual conditions. However, utilizing other patients’ data in the cohort might enable exploring possible stages in the data and where the new patient might fall in. The A dv P rog offers solutions to all three scenarios above. To address Scenario 1, a diagnostic classifier is necessary. B. Diagnostic Classifier for MCI vs. AD The first step of A dv P rog is to train a binary classifier with the cross-entropy loss function, given below. (1) ℒ C E f x i ; θ , y i = - y i l o g f x i ; θ - 1 - y i l o g 1 - f x i ; θ f ( ⋅ ; θ ) θ , f x i ; θ x i y i (2) m i n θ 1 N ∑ i = 1 N ℒ C E f x i ; θ , y i N In this study, a four-layer neural network with the leaky rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function in hidden layers and the sigmoid activation function in the output layer is trained to classify MCI and AD patients. Since the model has to be trained on limited training data, we avoid increasing the number of parameters that can lead to overfitting. Therefore, we avoid unnecessarily increasing the neural network’s depth and width. Dropout layers are also added to prevent overfitting. On the other hand, the architecture can be designed differently based on the complexity of the task since the A dv P rog does not depend on the architectural design of the classifier. We should also stress that the learned decision boundary should be successful enough to infer a reliable indication of the patient’s position in the input space. C. Finding MCI-to-AD Progression Direction Learning to classify MCI and AD patients corresponds to finding a decision boundary between the two categories. We argue that the distance of an MCI patient’s data point to the decision boundary could signify the progression of the disease. In other words, a progressive MCI patient’s distance to the decision boundary should be less than an early-stage or stable MCI patient’s. Therefore, we propose calculating a score related to the distance of an MCI patient’s sample to the decision boundary in the input space to predict the risk of conversion to AD. This score should be low for progressive MCI patients and high for stable MCI patients. Thus, we could associate a higher risk of conversion to AD with low scores. If a linear decision boundary is in question, the distance of a sample to the decision boundary can be easily calculated. In contrast, the distance to a non-linear decision boundary is unclear. However, non-linear models are widely used when a more general hypothesis set intended for data with non-linear behavior is considered. We propose to use adversarial attacks to infer how far a patient might be from the decision boundary. Adversarial attacks are perturbations tailored such that when added to the input, they change its prediction. Changing an input’s prediction means that the adversarial perturbation pushes the natural input in the input space towards the decision boundary, and the perturbed input, depending on the amount of perturbation, might cross to the other side of the decision boundary. We propose that the amount of perturbation required to flip the MCI prediction to AD can be used to reveal the MCI patient’s risk of conversion to the AD diagnosis. Adversarial attack and robustness studies [ 38 ] were first introduced for computer vision problems upon the discovery of Szegedy et al. that CNNs are vulnerable to imperceptible adversarial perturbations [ 39 ]. Whitebox attacks might be considered some of the most potent attacks since the attacker has full access to the trained architecture. The most effective white-box attacks, such as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [ 40 ] and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [ 41 ], require the gradient of the loss function with respect to the input. The gradient-based attacks perturb the input in the direction of misclassification. When an adversarial attack aims to fool the classifier, an attack budget limiting the attack strength is considered to ensure the perturbations are imperceptible. However, this study introduces employing adversarial attacks not to fool a classifier but to discover the risk of MCI-to-AD conversion. Therefore, in this study, an attack budget is not considered. We attack the cross-entropy loss of the binary classifier with incremental step sizes to obtain an adversarial disease progression direction in the input space as follows. (3) x ˆ i = x i + γ s i g n ∇ x i ℒ C E f x i ; θ , y i s i g n ∇ x i ℒ C E f x i ; θ , y i γ x ˆ i D. MCI-to-AD Conversion Prediction The attack step size, γ dv P rog given in Algorithm 1 , starts with a small step size and iteratively increments the step size by an ε dv P rog differs from iterative PGD attacks, where the gradient at the previously perturbed input is computed at each iteration. In contrast, the A dv P rog computes the gradient at the natural input once and applies some adversarial direction with increasing step sizes. The A dv P rog terminates when the prediction of the perturbed sample is flipped. The iteration number at which prediction flips from MCI to AD is stored as the patient’s progression score, s i dv P rog outputs a progression score for each patient in the training set, S = s 1 , … , s N Predicting the MCI-to-AD conversion is concerned with the patients whose current diagnosis is MCI. This problem is different from the binary classification of MCI and AD patients. To predict the conversion, we need to learn how to discriminate between MCI patients with a steady MCI diagnosis and a conversion to an AD diagnosis on the next visit. In this study, we propose to determine a threshold based on the progression score distribution of training MCI patients. The MCI-to-MCI and MCI-to-AD patients’ scores, as shown in Fig. 2 , are assumed to be almost normally distributed according to Central Limit Theorem . The mean of the MCI-to-MCI scores is expected to be higher than the mean of the MCI-to-AD scores since MCI-to-MCI patients might be further away from the decision boundary requiring a longer step than the MCI-to-AD patients toward the adversarial progression direction to change its prediction. Thus, the conversion prediction is performed by comparing the adversarial progression scores with a threshold determined from scores of the training set as given in (4) . (4) y ˆ i M C I - A D = 0 , s i ≥ threshold 1 , s i < threshold s i i y ˆ i MCI-AD E. Subtyping With Adversarial Progression Direction We investigate whether adversarial progression scores can be used to discover subtypes in MCI and AD patient groups. In this task, adversarial progression scores are also obtained for AD patients. As described earlier, progression scores are the number of attack steps at which a patient’s disease prediction flips to the other class. For the MCI group, we considered two subtypes, which are stable and progressive MCI. The target subtypes for the AD group are onset and severe AD. We determine thresholds around the mean adversarial progression scores for each group. The proposed progression approach is illustrated in Fig. 3 . As seen in the figure, we hypothesize that the region around the decision boundary depicted by dashed lines is where the conversion patients might reside. After obtaining the thresholds, we divide MCI patients into two subgroups, the stable MCI and the progressive MCI [ 42 ], whose scores are greater and less than the threshold, respectively. Similarly, onset AD and severe AD are determined with scores less and greater than their threshold, respectively. In this study, the thresholds are set empirically by investigating the clustering performance of the training set. We stress that high progression scores mean a more stable diagnosis for MCI patients and the severity of the diagnosis for AD patients. In Section IV , both MCI-to-AD predictions and subtypes obtained by the A dv P rog are evaluated. IV. Experiments All the deep models are implemented using the Pytorch library and Python. The four-layer neural network given in Table I is trained for 2000 epochs with ADAM optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.0001. The leakiness parameter of the leaky ReLU activation and the dropout probability are set to 0.2. All the reported classification performances are an average of 5-fold cross-validation test accuracies. Training and test splits do not share the same patients. FGSM attack step denoted by γ (3) varies between [10 −6 , 1] with an increment of 0.0002 for ADNI and [10 −6 , 2] with an increment of 0.002 for NACC datasets. The γ γ A. Datasets Two publicly available datasets, which are shared by The Alzheimer’s Disease Prediction Of Longitudinal Evolution (TADPOLE) Challenge [ 8 ], [ 11 ] and National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) [ 12 ], are used in the analysis. 1) TADPOLE: The TADPOLE data used in the preparation of this study were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database ( adni.loni.usc.edu ). The ADNI was launched in 2003 as a public-private partnership led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD. The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial MRI, PET, other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of MCI and early AD. For up-to-date information, see www.adniinfo.org . The TADPOLE challenge aimed to predict the onset of AD. The challenge shares three standard datasets, including longitudinal data for training and forecasting with rollover subjects. Our analysis concerns the TADPOLE_D1_D2 spreadsheet, where each row represents a patient’s visit containing various biomarkers. The biomarkers, CDRSB, ADAS11, ADAS13, MMSE, RAVLT_immediate, RAVLT_learning, RAVLT_forgetting, FAQ, Ventricles, Hippocampus, WholeBrain, Entorhinal, Fusiform, MidTemp, are chosen based on their lower missing rate compared with other biomarkers in the spreadsheet. The details of the biomarkers can be found on the challenge website https://tadpole.grand-challenge.org/Data/ . Since this study focuses on the MCI-to-AD conversion, only MCI and AD-labeled visits are included in the subset. Missing values in each patient’s biomarkers are imputed using forward filling if the values of prior visits are available. If only future visits are available, the current visit is imputed with backward filling. Patients with high missing rates are eliminated, resulting in 1,141 patients with various numbers of visits. We randomly split the patients into train and test sets of sizes 911 and 230 patients, respectively. The number of visits of each unique patient in the selected training set varies from 1 to 19 visits, where most patients have less than 10 visits. The significance of the biomarkers is investigated using Shapley values [ 43 ] with visit data. For this purpose, the training and test sets are converted into datasets of 2,956 and 1,294 visits, respectively. MCI and AD classes are balanced in the training set. After the MRI variables are normalized using the corresponding patient’s intracranial volume, min-max scaling is applied to all the variables. Minimum and maximum values are obtained from the training set. As seen in Fig. 4(a) , MRI measures do not significantly contribute to discriminating MCI and AD diagnosis for the dataset used in the experiments. For this reason, cognitive test scores are preferred in the analysis. 2) NACC: Uniform Data Set (UDS) version 3.0, released in March 2015, is used in our analysis. Each visit is annotated as MCI and AD based on their NACCUDSD value, a NACC-derived variable for cognitive status at a UDS visit. NACCUDSD 3 and 4 denote MCI and dementia, respectively. Since we specifically focus on the conversion from MCI to AD, the NACCALZP variable of the dementia group is also investigated. NACCALZP is also a NACC-derived variable implying that AD is the primary, contributing, or non-contributing cause of cognitive impairment. Thus, the AD group is sampled from patients whose NACCUDSD is 4, and NACCALZP is 1, corresponding to primary. In UDS v3, the NIA-AA criterion is used for AD diagnosis. For more information about the variables, please review the UDS Researchers Data Dictionary https://files.alz.washington.edu/documentation/uds3-rdd.pdf . The same data pre-processing procedure described in Section IV-A1 is employed for the NACC dataset. The variables that are determined based on their lower missing rate compared with other biomarkers are DIABETES, THYROID, MEMORY, ORIENT, JUDGMENT, COMMUN, COMPORT, HOMEHOBB, PERSCARE, NACCMMSE, NACCMOCA, CDRGLOB, CDRLANG, CDRSUM, BOSTON, DIGIB, ANIMALS, UDSVERFC, LOGIMEM, MEMUNITS, CRAFTURS, CRAFTDRE, MINTTOTS, DIGFORSL, DIGBACLS, TRAILA, TRAILB. Some of the variables can take specific integer values, e.g., −4, 97, 98, denoting that the value is unavailable or the test could not be conducted due to some problem. All the values other than the regular values the variables can take are treated as NaNs. After the missing value imputation and elimination of patients with high missing value rates, we obtain a total of 15,596 patients who are further randomly split into a training set of 12,476 and a test set of 3,120 subjects. The number of visits of each unique patient in the selected training set varies from 2 to 17 visits, where most patients have less than 6 visits. The significance of the above variables is investigated using Shapley values [ 43 ] with visit data. For this purpose, the training and test sets are converted into datasets of 31,128 and 8,785 visits, respectively. MCI and AD classes are balanced in the training set. Since the MRI measurements are not recorded for each visit, they are not included in the analysis. Variable values are normalized using min-max scaling with the same approach in Section IV-A1 . In Fig. 4(b) , Shapley values suggest the following 14 variables: MEMORY, JUDGMENT, COMMUN, HOMEHOBB, PERSCARE, NACCMMSE, NACCMOCA, CDRSUM, BOSTON, ANIMALS, LOGIMEM, MEMUNITS, CRAFTDRE, MINTTOTS. Thus, we continue our analysis with these 14 variables. B. Baselines Most recent studies focusing on neurophysiological biomarkers employ traditional ML models such as logistic regression (LR) [ 10 ], [ 15 ], [ 44 ], Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [ 10 ], [ 15 ], Random Forest (RF) [ 10 ], [ 15 ], [ 16 ], Gradient Boosting Trees (GBTs) [ 15 ], [ 16 ], [ 44 ], and ensemble of these models [ 17 ], [ 18 ]. Therefore, the A dv P rog performance is compared with the abovementioned fundamental and effective models. The fuzzy decision tree, implemented using the fuzzytree package, is also added to the baselines as some studies employ fuzzy classifiers [ 1 45 ], [ 46 ]. The LR, SVM, RF, and GBT classifiers are implemented using scikit-learn [ 47 ]. The maximum depth of RF is set to 3. The number of estimators, learning rate, and maximum depth of GBT are set to 100, 1.0, and 1, respectively. SVM is trained with radial basis function and C = 5.0 As per deep models, the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network [ 48 ], 1D-CNN [ 49 ], transformer network [ 50 ], and TabNet [ 51 ], an attention-based deep architecture proposed for tabular data, are trained. LSTM networks are widely used in time series forecasting and classification tasks [ 52 ], [ 53 ]. LSTM’s hidden state dimensionality is set to 32. Its output layer comprises one fully connected layer with leaky ReLU with a parameter of 0.2, dropout with a probability of 0.2, and one final layer with sigmoid activation. The two-layer transformer encoder comprised input and output layers of 32 neurons, 4 attention heads, and hidden layers of 64 neurons with a dropout probability of 0.2. Masking is used to prevent attending to future time steps during the training of the transformer. Finally, a two-layer 1D-CNN with 16 and 2 channels, leaky ReLU, and kernel size of 3, is trained. All the deep models are trained for 3000 epochs with a mini-batch size of 128 and ADAM optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.0001 except for TabNet, which was trained with the author suggested default hyperparameters [ 51 ]. All the baseline models are trained to predict the next visit’s diagnosis. C. Predictive Analysis The first step of A dv P rog framework in Algorithm 1 is to learn a decision boundary between MCI and AD samples. For this purpose, the binary classifiers are trained for TADPOLE and NACC datasets. The same architecture is used for both datasets except for their input layer’s dimensionality since the numbers of input variables are different. Classification results are reported in Table II . 1) MCI-to-AD Conversion Prediction: After the binary classifier is obtained, the adversarial progression scores are computed following the steps between 2 and 13 in Algorithm 1 . In the experiments, three different prediction thresholds, μ - σ , μ - 0.1 σ μ - 0.5 σ μ σ Table III . In Table III , six different results are reported for the proposed framework. In the first three, we evaluate the proposed framework with the thresholds given above, and the MCI patients are obtained by looking at their ground truth labels. We investigate a more realistic scenario in the last three, denoted by the ∗ sign in Table III . In this scenario, the MCI patients whose predicted future states are determined based on the classifier’s predictions since we may not have the ground truth labels in a realistic scenario. This way, we can also examine the error correction capability of the proposed approach. In other words, if the predicted MCI patient is, in fact, an AD patient, the A dv P rog should predict a conversion. When compared to baselines, one of the most prominent advantages of the proposed approach is increasing the MCI-to-AD conversion recall by changing the threshold. Improving the conversion recall has a side effect on the stable MCI recall. However, being able to predict MCI-to-AD conversion better is crucial to reduce the risk. The results in Table III show that the proposed approach has predictive power, which shows that a binary classifier trained for discriminating MCI and AD patients can be used to predict disease progression in the A dv P rog framework. Moreover, the proposed framework can detect patients with an MCI-to-AD conversion risk much better than the baseline methods for both datasets. Our experiments indicate that the traditional ML models perform similarly with the chosen biomarkers. 1D-CNN is more prominent than the other baselines in terms of MCI-to-AD recall. 2) Error Correction Property: There are two types of errors that the proposed framework might commit. The binary classifier may misclassify an AD patient as MCI and an MCI patient as AD. The former has more severe consequences than the latter. When the binary classifier predicts the current diagnosis of an MCI patient as AD, this patient will not be included in the A dv P rog framework to predict its potential conversion to AD. On the other hand, this outcome is still expected to attract physician’s attention since the predicted label is AD. However, if the binary classifier predicts an AD patient’s current diagnosis as MCI, this patient will be a subject for the A dv P rog framework, and the proposed algorithm will predict the patient’s future state. In this case, if the A dv P rog algorithm can predict a conversion in the next visit, the binary classifier’s misclassification error will be compensated. We summarize the error correction results in Table IV . The TADPOLE test set has a total of 1441 visits, and 73 of them were misclassified as AD although they were annotated as MCI. Whereas 46 AD visits out of 1441 were misclassified as MCI, which are critical to be predicted as MCI-to-AD by the A dv P rog . For thresholds μ - 0.1 σ μ - 0.5 σ μ - σ μ - 0.1 σ μ - 0.5 σ μ - σ dv P rog , respectively. The results demonstrate that the A dv P rog can compensate for the binary classifier’s mistake of classifying AD patients as MCI. 3) Temporal Behavior of the Progression Scores: The adversarial progression scores of patients with an MCI-to-AD conversion step in their progression path were hypothesized to decrease as the condition progresses to a conversion. To verify the expected temporal behavior of the A dv P rog scores, we provide Fig. 5 , where the average adversarial progression scores for the patients in the TADPOLE and NACC training sets are plotted. Fig. 5(a) and (b) are obtained by averaging the last 6 visit scores of 77 and 153 TADPOLE and NACC patients with at least 6 visits, respectively. All the patients represented in Fig. 5 have an MCI-to-AD conversion at their last visits, T. Fig. 5(a) for the TADPOLE patients demonstrate a constant decrease toward the last visit coherent with the expected behavior. Fig. 5(b) shows an overall decrease for the NACC patients, but fluctuations until the conversion step are also visible. The fluctuations are also anticipated since progression patterns differ for patients. We conclude that the A dv P rog ’s outcome is consistent with our initial hypothesis. D. Subtyping We also evaluate the subtyping capability of A dv P rog . For the TADPOLE training set, the MCI threshold is set as μ M C I - 1.5 σ M C I μ A D - 1.5 σ A D μ MCI - 1.4 σ MCI μ A D - 0.4 σ A D We report the average normalized variable values for the obtained training subtypes in Tables V and VI . The expected behavior is an increase in the values, which are supposed to be high for a cognitive decline when we move from Stable-MCI to Severe-AD subtypes, such as CDRSB, ADAS11, ADAS13, FAQ variables in TADPOLE and MEMORY, JUDGMENT, COMMUN, HOMEHOBB, PERSCARE, CDRSUM variables in NACC. Similarly, toward the Severe-AD direction, we expect to observe a decrease in cognitive scores, such as MMSE, RAVLT scores in TADPOLE and NACCMMSE, NACCMOCA, BOSTON, ANIMALS, LOGIMEM, MEMUNITS, CRAFTDRE, and MINTTOTS in NACC. As we can see, the expected behavior is achieved in Tables V and VI . We also investigate the statistical significance of the subtyping. Silhouette scores, t-statistics, and p-values of a one-tail t-test are reported in Table VIII . We consider MMSE and ADAS13 scores for the TADPOLE and MMSE and MOCA scores for evaluating the statistical significance of the subtyping for the NACC dataset. For MMSE and MOCA scores, the null hypothesis is H 0 : μ score 1 - μ score 2 = 0 H 1 : μ score 1 - μ score 2 > 0 μ score 1 μ score 2 H 1 Table VIII shows that although the Silhouette scores computed with all the variables do not demonstrate a strong clustering, the statistical test for the diagnostic AD assessment scores indicates significant subtyping with p-values lower than 0.01. E. Case Study The use of A dv P rog in a relatively realistic scenario is presented here. Conversion patients in the test split of the TADPOLE dataset, resulting in 55 patients, are selected. The chosen patient group’s visits comprise stable MCI, stable AD, and rarely MCI-to-AD labels. We first investigate the average precision and recall performance for predicting the next visit as MCI and AD in Table VII , where the precision and recall of AD contain MCI-to-AD conversion and stable AD predictions. The table compares the performances of the top-performing methods. The A dv P rog consistently provides the best AD recall, indicating the ability to identify conversion and stable AD better than the baselines. Now, the primary purpose of the case study is to focus on a specific patient for a more detailed evaluation. The selected patient’s first five visits are stable MCI, the sixth and seventh visits are labeled as MCI-to-AD, and the rest of the three visits are AD. In a realistic scenario, the physicians might want to know the predicted diagnoses of the current and following visits, whether the patient is progressing toward AD, how close the conversion is, and the new patient’s similarity to a subgroup in the training cohort. The A dv P rog predicts MCI for the first six visits and AD for the rest. Therefore, the conversion is detected at the seventh visit, which is, in fact, MCI-to-AD. A dv P rog also points out the MCI patient’s progression by investigating the progression scores. The progression scores of the first seven visits were computed as 582, 417, 439, 352, 286, 286, and 42. The decreasing trend with a significant drop at the seventh visit indicates a progression and rising risk of conversion to AD. The A dv P rog suggests that the patient belongs to the stable MCI subtype for the first six visits but later changes to progressive MCI with a progression score of 42, less than the subtyping threshold of 82. The A dv P rog explains the reason for the MCI and AD predictions for the sixth and seventh visits, respectively, that the sixth visit’s progression score is higher than the seventh, indicating that the patient vector of the sixth visit is further away from the decision boundary. One could investigate whether the sixth visit’s data is closer to an MCI group by investigating the similarity of the patient’s data to stable or progressive MCI subtypes. Suppose we wanted to answer the same questions using the baseline methods. Then, we needed to train separate models to predict the diagnoses of the current and subsequent visits, use a clustering technique to obtain subgroups, and determine which similarity or distance metric to use to obtain similar patients and subtypes. We would also need to determine whether to cluster the patients using their input biomarkers or the patient representations learned by the models. Temporal and cross-sectional representations might result in different subtypes. Consequently, additional techniques and effort would be needed to provide more than predictions that lead to new studies. V. Conclusion This study proposes an adversarial disease progression framework, A dv P rog comprising a binary classifier and adversarial attack generation for early prediction of MCI-to-AD conversion. The resulting adversarial progression scores quantify a patient’s distance to the decision boundary, where proximity implies a higher risk of conversion. The A dv P rog could also be utilized to obtain Stable-MCI, Progressive-MCI, Onset-AD, and Severe-AD subtypes by thresholding the adversarial progression scores. Experiments conducted with TADPOLE [ 8 ], [ 11 ] and NACC [ 12 ] datasets show that the A dv P rog improves the recall of MCI-to-AD conversion. Furthermore, the subtyping experiments reveal statistically significant groupings. In summary, the proposed framework has a promising performance in conversion prediction and subtyping tasks. On the other hand, the A dv P rog has the following limitations. The model assumes that a multi-layer perceptron can be trained to distinguish MCI and AD visits. A classifier with poor discriminative performance is a limitation since the adversarial attack employs the classifier’s prediction to find adversarial directions. However, as discussed in Section IV-C2 , the proposed framework might handle this situation. Second, two consecutive patient visits are necessary for determining the thresholds for prediction and subtyping during training. The thresholds are determined from training set statistics and heuristics. For each new dataset, the thresholds should be reset.