Background Recent advancements in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) research have reconceptualized the methods of disease staging and diagnosis, in which biomarkers play a critical role. In the 2018 National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) AT(N) [amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration] framework, AD was defined by its biology rather than by clinical syndrome presentation [ 1 ]. The revised criteria in 2024 for the diagnosis and staging of AD grouped the biomarkers into three broad categories: core biomarkers of AD neuropathologic change, i.e., β-amyloid (Aβ) and tau; non-specific biomarkers that are important in AD pathogenesis but are also involved in other brain diseases, i.e., N (neuropil injury, dysfunction, or degeneration), I (inflammation); and biomarkers of common non-AD copathologies [ 2 ]. Furthermore, an explicit biological staging scheme that uses only core biomarkers is recommended for assessing the biological severity of AD, and a staging scheme using amyloid and tau positron emission tomography (PET) as core biomarkers has been proposed [ 2 ]. The incorporation of I into the AT(N) model enhances diagnostic accuracy and provides insights into cognitive outcomes associated with core biomarker combinations. Tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are one of the two pathologic hallmarks of AD [ 3 ]. Tau biomarkers include the quantification of insoluble NFTs using PET imaging and the measurement of soluble phosphorylated tau (p-tau) in plasma [ 4 ]. Tau pathology is closely related to the clinical symptoms of AD dementia [ 5 ]. In vivo studies have highlighted the association between tau aggregation and prospective cognitive decline [ 6 – 8 ]. Therefore, the advent of tau-sensitive PET imaging enables the detection of abnormal cerebral tau accumulation at early stages of AD in the living brain with high sensitivity and specificity. It is assumed that the stepwise progression of NFTs in AD follows a specific topographic pattern and correlates with NFT Braak stages, which have been shown to be associated with disease progression and cognitive decline [ 9 – 12 ]. Several studies have demonstrated that the earliest tau pathology does not initially manifest in the cerebral cortex but rather in specific subcortical nuclei, particularly in the locus coeruleus (LC) [ 12 – 17 ]. The pathological progression of tau associated with AD begins in the LC as early as the first decade of life and spreads to cortical regions through a yet unidentified mechanism. A novel subnanomolar affinity second-generation tau tangles tracer has been developed to identify and quantify the spatial and temporal pattern of tau pathology [ 18 ]. The use of 18 F-MK-6240 uptake to stratify individuals with abnormal tau deposition in clinical and research settings is supported by its high sensitivity to tau tangles [ 19 , 20 ]. More studies are needed to focus on tau accumulation in subcortical regions, where tau may accumulate before Aβ accumulation, according to autopsy studies [ 12 , 21 ]. Post-mortem studies suggest that tau tangles follow a stereotypical pattern of deposition, known as Braak stages, indicating that tau accumulation begins in the transentorhinal cortex [ 9 , 11 ]. With advanced PET imaging technique and 2nd generation tau tracers, it becomes feasible to measure tau deposits in subcortical regions in vivo with higher sensitive and quantitative accuracy. Growing evidence suggests that immune and inflammatory mechanisms play an important role in the pathogenic pathway of AD [ 20 , 22 , 23 ]. Plasma glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) serves as a biomarker for reactive astrogliosis [ 24 ]. Plasma GFAP levels progressively increase in AD patients across stages, from preclinical AD to prodromal AD and AD dementia [ 24 – 29 ]. Recent studies indicate that the interplay between neuroinflammation and tau pathology is complex [ 30 ]. Astrocyte reactivity is closely related to the occurrence and progression of tau-related neuropathology in AD [ 31 ]. Experimental results suggest that astrocytes are essential for the Aβ-induced tau phosphorylation and that astrocyte reactivity is an important upstream event which links Aβ with the initiation of tau pathology [ 32 ]. Moreover, tau is also present in the astrocytes of individuals with AD. However, few published studies have reported on how subcortical tau accumulation is associated with astrocytes. This study aimed to investigate the combined effect of subcortical regional tau deposition measured with PET imaging (Tau-PET) and the astrocyte biomarker plasma GFAP on cognitive function across three groups: cognitively unimpaired elderly (CU group), individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI group) and those with dementia due to AD (AD group). Our findings could offer valubale insights for drug development and other therapeutic strategies for AD. Methods Participants The study was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of Chinese PLA General Hospital and conducted in accordance with Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. A total of 105 participants were enrolled and grouped into the CU ( n = 22), MCI ( n = 46) and AD ( n = 37) groups according to following criteria. The diagnosis of AD was made by two neurological specialists according to the NIA-AA criteria [ 33 ]. The Petersen criteria [ 34 ] were used to diagnose MCI participants. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale was used to assess dementia severity. Participants with CDR scores larger than 1 were categorized into the AD group, while those with subjective or objective cognitive impairments and a CDR = 0.5 were enrolled in the MCI group. Participants over 50 years old with unimpaired cognitive function were enrolled in the CU group. All participants underwent standardized neurological clinical examinations, neuropsychological test, blood test, PET/CT and PET/MR imaging. Exclusion criteria include: (i) severe psychiatric illness including major depression or schizophrenia, or any severe systemic medical condtions affecting neuropsychological testing results or confounding plasma biomarker measurements; (ii) current or recent drug or chronic alcohol dependence; (iii) contraindications for PET or MR examinations; (iv) Aβ-PET negative MCI or AD participants; (v) unsatisfactory PET or MR image quality. Amyloid positivity was assessed by two nuclear medicine experts using visual interpretation, based on the official criteria of the J-ADNI PET Core [ 35 ]. Cognitive assessment Cognitive performance of all participants was assessed using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Memory was evaluted with the World Health Organization-University of California-Los Angeles Auditory Verbal Learning Test (WHO-UCLA AVLT), including immediate recall and delayed recall. Verbal fluency was assessed using the Boston Naming test Category fluency task (animal naming). Attention was measured with the Trail Making Test-Part A and Digit Span Forward test, and executive function was assessed using the Trail Making Test-Part B and Digit Span Backward test. The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD) was used to assess the severity of depression, while Hamilton anxiety scale (HAMA) was used to assess the patients’ anxiety levels. MMSE and MoCA scores were transformed to z-scores based on the mean and standard deviation of the CU group. Global cognitive scores were calculated by averaging the z-scores of MMSE and MoCA, normalized to the CU group. Measurement of plasma biomarkers Participants were asked to fast overnight before the blood samples were collected. Plasma was separated from whole blood within 2 h after blood sampling. The plasma was then stored at -80◦C at baseline for further biomarker assays. Plasma-based biomarker analysis was performed using an ultra-sensitive single-molecule array (SIMOA) technology (Quanterix, MA, USA) on an automated Simoa HD-1 platform (Peking Union Medicine College Hospital, China). The Neurology 2-Plex B Assay Kit (GFAP) (Cat No: 103520) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For all measurements, calibrators and quality controls were measured in duplicate. Sample measurements were performed in a single run basis using kits with the same lot. Technicians were blind to the clinical information of the samples. Image acquisition and processing Amyloid PET scanning was performed using a total-body PET/CT scanner (uEXPLORER, United Imaging Healthcare, Shanghai, China). All participants underwent a 20-min head scan 40 min after an intravenous injection of 3.7–5.5 MBq/Kg 11 C-PIB. A low-dose CT scan was performed for attenuation correction. The PET images were reconstructed using ordered subset expectation maximization (OSEM) algorithm with the following parameters: time-of-flight and point-spread-function modeling, 3 iterations, 20 subsets, 256 × 256 matrix, slice thickness of 1.443 mm, and Gaussian filter of 2 mm in full width at half maximum. Scatter, random, attenuation and other vendor default corrections were applied. Tau-PET scans were performed on a PET/MR scanner (Signa, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA). PET images were acquired from 90 to 110 min after the intravenous injection of 370 MBq 18 F-MK-6240. High-resolution brain T1-weighted (T1w) images were acquired with a 3D BRAVO sequence with the following parameters: repetition time 7.4 ms, echo time 2. 8 ms, flip angle 12◦, field-of-view 256 × 256 mm, and 1 mm slice thickness. The T1w brain images were segmented into white matter, gray matter, cerebral spinal fluid and non-brain tissue on tissue probability maps. Gray matter images were spatially normalized to MNI152 space. The Aβ-PET and Tau-PET images were registered to their corresponding structural T1w images and then normalized to MNI152 space using the transform function derived during gray matter normalization. The cerebellum gray matter and inferior gray matter of the cerebellum were used as reference regions to calculate voxel-wise standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) maps of Aβ-PET and Tau-PET, respectively. Voxel-wise comparisons were performed using 2-sample t -test in SPM12 with p < 0.05, and k > 20. Family wise error (FWE) correction was applied for multiple comparisons. In region of interest (ROI)-based SUVR analysis, the cortical ROIs included the frontal, superior parietal, temporal, occipital, anterior cingulate gyrus and posterior cingulate gyrus. The subcortical ROIs, included the amygdala, accumbens, caudate, putamen, pallidum, hippocampus, para-hippocampal gyrus (PHG), thalamus, LC, and olfactory tubercle. The SUVRs of these ROIs were obtained from Aβ-PET and Tau-PET images and then compared between the AD, MCI and CU groups using 2-sample t -test or Mann-Whitney U test. These ROIs were obtained based on automated anatomic labeling atlas 3 [ 36 ]. All images were processed using the Statistical Parametric Mapping version 12 (SPM12, https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ) toolbox. Statistical analysis Demographic, cognitive scores and plasma GFAP levels were pairwise compared between the CU, MCI and AD groups. For numerical data, normality was tested, and either 2-sample t- test or Mann-Whitney U test was applied as appropriate. For category data, chi-square test was used. A p- value of 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. We tested the following questions: (1) whether Aβ- or Tau-PET load at subcortical regions was associated with cognitive impairment, (2) whether Aβ- or Tau-PET load in subcortical regions associated with changes of plasma GFAP and (3) whether Tau-PET can differentiate AD from MCI when Aβ-PET is positive. The association between regional SUVR and cognitive scores in MCI and AD group is calculated using partial correlation analysis with controlling of age and sex. The association between plasma GFAP and cognitive scores is also analyzed. The diagnostic efficacy of Tau-PET, Aβ-PET and plasma GFAP as biomarkers for differentiating AD and MCI was evaluated using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), along with measures of accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and precision. The diagnostic performance of these biomarkers was analyzed in isolation and in combinations: Tau-PET + plasma GFAP, Aβ-PET + plasma GFAP, Tau-PET + Aβ-PET, and Tau-PET + Aβ-PET + plasma GFAP. Logistic regression models were used to combine these biomarkers for distinguishing AD from MCI, and the models’ outputs were assessed with ROC analysis. Addtionally, the performance of subcortical ROI-based analysis was compared to cortical ROI-based analysis using DeLong test. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS (IBM, version 22.0). Results Demographics A total of 22 CU, 46 MCI and 37 AD participants were enrolled (Fig. 1 ). Table 1 presents demographic and clinical characteristics of the CU, MCI and AD groups. The mean age of the MCI group (72.98 ± 8.43) was higher than that of the AD (68.7 ± 8.25) and CU (64.61 ± 8.14) groups ( t = 8.31, p < 0.05). There was no statistically significant difference in the sex ratio between the groups ( x 2 = 0.82, p > 0.05). The MMSE and MoCA scores of the AD group were lower than those of the MCI and CU groups. The CDR scores of the AD group ranged from 1 to 3. The MCI and CU groups have CDR scores of 0.5 and 0, respectively. Compared with the CU group, the MCI and AD groups had significantly lower neuropsychological test scores. Plasma GFAP levels were higher in the AD and MCI groups than in the CU group ( p < 0.05). Moreover, the plasma GFAP level of the AD group was also higher than the MCI group ( p < 0.05). Fig. 1 Participant enrollment flowchart Table 1 Participant characteristics Cognitively unimpaired ( N = 22) Mild cognitive impairment ( N = 46) Alzheimer’s disease ( N = 37) t/z values p value Age 64.61 (8.14) 72.98 (8.43) a 68.7 (8.25) b 8.31 < 0.001 Female, N (%) 15 (68.2) 34 (73.9) 24 (64.9) 0.82 0.665 Education, y 11.86 (4.25) 12.87 (3.51) 9.7 (3.06) a, b 12.95 0.002 MMSE 28.45 (1.3) 25.04 (2.29) a 16.68 (5.57) a, b 74.6 < 0.001 MoCA 26.72 (1.93) 20.57 (3.16) a 12.19 (5.96) a, b 71.74 < 0.001 CDR 0.5 1 1.4 (0.64) - - UCLA-I 25.77 (10.18) 15.61 (5.77) a 8.67 (4.8) a, b 77.7 < 0.001 UCLA-D 9.55 (2.28) 3.34 (2.98) a 1.37 (1.9) a, b 55.34 < 0.001 DS-forward 8.59 (1.05) 7.61 (1.6) 6.26 (1.7) a, b 26.07 < 0.001 DS-backward 5.86 (1.52) 4.29 (1.37) a 3.19 (1.11) a, b 34.09 < 0.001 TT-A (s) 46.41 (15.15) 72.47 (32.63) a 127.74 (34.05) a, b 41.35 < 0.001 TT-B (s) 93.23 (36.45) 134.45 (73.2) a 263.41 (68.97) a, b 40.72 < 0.001 HAMD 0.9 (1.63) 3.84 (3.9) a 7.93 (7.13) a, b 22.08 < 0.001 HAMA 0.59 (1.26) 2.63 (2.49) a 7.07 (8) a, b 32.17 < 0.001 GFAP (pg/ml) 105.5 (43.43) 233.67 (76.88) a 327.94 (146.89) a, b 34.7 < 0.001 Notes : Data is presented as mean (SD). a: p < 0.05, compared to CU group; b: p < 0.05, compared to MCI group Abbreviations: GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; MMSE, mini-mental state examination; MoCA, Montreal cognitive assessment; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; UCLA AVLT-I, the University of California-Los Angeles Auditory Verbal Learning Test Immediate recall; UCLA AVLT-D, the University of California-Los Angeles Auditory Verbal Learning Test Delayed recall; DS, Digit Span test; TT-A, Trail Making Test-Part A; TT-B, Trail Making Test-Part B; HAMD, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; HAMA, Hamilton Anxiety Scale; N, number; y, year Comparison of cortical Aβ and tau deposition between groups Differences in SUVRs for Aβ- and Tau-PET between groups are shown in Fig. 2 . The AD and MCI groups had higher Aβ deposition in the bilateral frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and cingulate gyrus (FWE corrected, p < 0.05). The AD group had higher tau uptake in the right temporal inferior gyrus and bilateral frontal inferior orbital gyrus compared to the MCI group (FWE corrected, p < 0.05). The AD group also showed higher tau deposition in the bilateral fusiform and inferior temporal gyrus compared to the CU group (FWE corrected, p < 0.05). The MCI group had greater tau aggregation in the bilateral middle cingulate compared to the CU group (FWE corrected, p < 0.05). Mean SUVR maps of Aβ- and Tau-PET load across the whole brain for the three groups were generated for visualization (Supplemental Figure S1 ). Group comparisons from ROI analysis showed that the AD group had higher tau accumulation in cortical areas compared to the MCI and CU groups. The level of Aβ accumulation in cortical areas was similar between the AD and MCI groups but higher than in the CU group (Supplemental Figure S2 , S3 ). We further compared the diagnostic efficiency of cortical ROIs to the combined subcortical ROI using the AUC. Results from the DeLong test indicated that the difference in AUC between cortical and subcortical ROI was not statistically significant (Supplemental Table S1 ). Therefore, cortical areas were not included in the final model. Fig. 2 Voxel-wise comparisons of Aβ-PET and Tau-PET between groups. A – C : Aβ-PET. D – F : Tau-PET. The statistical significance level was 0.001 with no correction for comparing Aβ-PET between the AD and MCI groups. Other comparisons used FWE corrected p < 0.05 as significant level. Color bar: t value Subcortical Aβ and tau deposition between groups We compared the mean SUVR of subcortical ROIs between groups (Fig. 3 ). The results showed that the MCI and AD groups had higher Aβ load in the accumbens, putamen, pallidum and olfactory tubercle compared to CU group ( p < 0.05). The MCI group had higher Aβ-PET load in the amygdala, caudate, PHG and thalamus, compared to CU group. The MCI and AD groups had higher tau levels in the amygdala, accumbens, putamen, pallidum, hippocampus, PHG and olfactory tubercle compared to the CU group ( p < 0.05). The AD group had higher tau deposition in the accumbens, putamen, PHG and olfactory tubercle compared to MCI group ( p < 0.05). The difference in tau deposition was not statistically significant in the caudate, LC and thalamus. Fig. 3 Comparisons for Aβ- and Tau-PET SUVRs in the subcortical regions. A – J : Group comparisons of Aβ-PET load in the amygdala, accumbens, caudate, putamen, pallidum, hippocampus, PHG, LC, olfactory tubercle, and thalamus. K – T : Group comparisons of Tau-PET load in the amygdala, accumbens, caudate, putamen, pallidum, hippocampus, PHG, LC, olfactory tubercle, and thalamus. PHG: para-hippocampal gyrus, LC: locus coeruleus. *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01, ***: p < 0.001, ****: p < 0.0001 Association between regional subcortical tau level and cognitive performance Our results showed the regional subcortical Aβ deposition and global cognitive scores was not correlated ( p > 0.05). However, tau uptake levels in the amygdala ( r = -0.404, p = 0.012), PHG ( r = -0.361, p = 0.026) and olfactory tubercle ( r = -0.368, p = 0.029) were negatively correlated with global cognitive scores in the MCI group (Fig. 4 ). The subcortical tau SUVRs in the AD group did not correlate with global cognitive scores ( p > 0.05). Fig. 4 Association between tau SUVRs in subcortical regions and global cognitive scores in the MCI group. PHG: para-hippocampal gyrus Association between plasma GFAP and cognitive performance To examine the association between plasma GFAP and cognitive performance in the MCI and AD groups, the correlation between plasma GFAP and global cognitive scores was analyzed. Results showed that higher plasma GFAP levels ( r = -0.393, p = 0.008) was associated with lower global cognitive scores in the MCI and AD groups (Fig. 5 ). The correlation analysis also found a significant positive correlation between mean subcortical tau SUVR and plasma GFAP ( r = 0.50, p = 0.004) in the MCI and AD groups (Fig. 5 ). However, there was no significant correlation between regional subcortical Aβ SUVR and plasma GFAP. Fig. 5 Relationship between plasma GFAP levels, global cognitive scores and tau SUVRs in the combined subcortical regions. A : Correlation between plasma GFAP and global cognitive scores in the AD and MCI groups. B : Correlation between plasma GFAP and tau SUVR of the combined subcortical ROIs in the AD and MCI groups Combined ROI analysis In the MCI group, tau SUVR levels in the amygdala, PHG and olfactory tubercle were correlated with global cognitive scores. Therefore, these regions were merged into a single ROI and are referred to as the combined ROI hereafter. The mean tau SUVR of the combined ROI in the MCI group was negatively correlated with global cognitive scores ( r = -0.38, p = 0.02, Fig. 6 ). The combined subcortical tau SUVR was positively correlated with the combined subcortical Aβ SUVR in the MCI group ( r = 0.334, p = 0.038, Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Relationship between tau SUVRs, Aβ SUVRs in the combined subcortial ROIs, and global cognitive scores in the MCI group Diagnostic efficiency We further explored the ability to differentiate between AD and MCI among Aβ-PET positive participants. Among those measurements, the combination of Tau-PET, Aβ-PET and plasma GFAP demonstrated the highest diagnostic performance with an AUC of 0.82, sensitivity of 0.69, specificity of 0.81 and precision of 0.79. The AUC for the combination of Tau-PET and plasma GFAP was the 2nd highest, at 0.8 (Fig. 7 , Supplemental Table S2 ). Fig. 7 ROC curves for differentiating AD and MCI Discussion Diagnosing AD, the leading cause of dementia, remains challenging, even for experienced neurologists. This study investigated the roles of subcortical tau SUVR and plasma GFAP in explaining cognitive impairment within a cohort of individuals with various degrees of cognitive impairment or AD. Tau is more sensitive than Aβ for detecting cognitive impairment Our findings revealed distinct pathological patterns between AD and MCI cohorts. The results from Aβ-PET imaging show high tracer uptake in multiple brain regions in both the MCI and AD groups. However, the difference in SUVR between the MCI and AD group was not significant after FWE correction. Furthermore, Aβ levels in the AD and MCI group did not correlate with cognitive performance metrics. Consequently, Aβ-PET was not effective in distinguishing between MCI and AD in our study cohort. The newly revised diagnostic criteria incorporate a biological staging scheme for amyloid and Tau-PET [ 2 ]. This scheme takes into acount both topography (distinguishing between medial temporal lobe and neocortical uptake) and the magnitude of Tau-PET in the neocortex [ 2 ]. Previous studies have shown that the presence of tau exceeding Braak stage IV significantly increases the risk for AD-relevant cognitive decline [ 6 , 7 , 37 , 38 ]. Neocortical Tau-PET abnormalities are associated with more advanced stages of the disease and worse outcomes. Therefore, tau pathology requires a regional approach to capture distinctive regional patterns, which is crucial for the timely and reliable detection of AD, particularly in patients with MCI. This approach has important implications for intervening and attempting to delay functional decline and disability. Our study demonstrated a pattern of tau accumulation that is consistent with the hypothesis that tau accumulates initially in subcortical structures and spreads into neocortex. This pattern aligns partially with the in vivo staging scheme that is similar to pathological tau Braak stages [ 9 , 11 ]. Our finding suggests Tau-PET is a more sensitive modality for detecting the differences between AD and MCI compared to Aβ-PET. In the MCI group, cognitive scores were negatively correlated with tau SUVR in the amygdala, PHG and olfactory tubercle. However, we did not find statistically significant correlation between tau SUVR and cognitive scores in the AD group. One possible reason may be that subcortical tau accumulation does not follow a linear progression through the AD continuum. In the MCI group, the deterioration of cognitive function aligns with subcortical tau accumulation. When subcortical tau accumulation exceeds a certain threshold, MCI may progress to the AD stage, at which point the level of subcortical tau accumulation may no longer reflect the severity of cognitive decline. However, due to the small sample size of our study, we were unable to perform further analyses to support these assumptions. Future studies with larger cohorts are warranted to conduct more in-depth research. Another reason for the lack of association between subcortical tau accumulation and cognitive decline in AD group may be that only Aβ positive MCI and AD subjects were enrolled in our study. This specific enrollment method might have weakened the association between cognitive decline and subcortical tau accumulation. Bucci et al. had shown that effects of Aβ-negative and tau-positive conditions did not reach the statistical significance in predicting cognitive decline [ 7 ]. Moreover, while most AD patients present high levels of both Aβ and tau, approximately 15–20% of Aβ-positive probable AD patients have low tau levels [ 39 ]. This discrepancy may relate to low concentrations of tau binding sites or the ability of tau tracers bind varied tau conformations. Our results indicate that both Aβ and tau are deposited more in the nucleus accumbens, putamen, globus pallidus, and olfactory tubercles in the MCI than in the CU group. Consequently, a strong correlation between Aβ deposition and tau deposition in the subcortical combined ROI in the MCI group was found. Notably, the molecular PET defined AD did not align well with pathologically defined definite AD. Initially, Aβ and tau were deposited in different brain regions - Aβ in the neocortex and tau in the brainstem and trans-/entorhinal cortex - with their topographic distribution patterns overlaps only minimally over time [ 40 , 41 ]. Brier et al., [ 42 ] used multivariate analysis to identify unique disease-related topographic patterns of Aβ and tau aggregation. While the Aβ and tau morphologies are spatially distinct, they are related to disease progression. We also compared the diagnostic efficiency of cortical areas with that of the combined subcortical ROI, as evaluated by AUC. The results of the DeLong test showed that the difference in AUC between cortical and subcortical areas was not statistically significant. Importantly, tau accumulation may occur earlier in subcortical than in cortical areas, which is important for the early detection of cognitive impairment. Thus, our study focused on Aβ and tau accumulation in subcortical regions. Our results provide evidence for the pathological patterns within the AD continuum. Tau accumulation in subcortical regions progresses alongside cognitive impairment during the preclinical stage of the AD continuum. A key finding of our study is the added value of Tau-PET for timely and early diagnosis compared head-to-head with other neuroimaging biomarkers. Our findings suggest that Tau-PET is more sensitive than Aβ-PET in detecting cognitive impairment, making it a potentially effective biomarker for monitoring the progression of AD. Recently published prospective results demonstrate that Tau-PET has the best predictive performance for clinical progression among individuals with MCI [ 43 ]. Our data further suggest that subcortical Tau-PET load in Aβ-positive MCI patients is significantly associated with cognitive decline. Therefore, we conclude that in Aβ-positive MCI patients, subcortical Tau-PET may serve as a predictor for future progression to dementia. In this context, anti-tau therapies may be more effective. Astrocytosis and cognitive decline According to newly revised diagnostic criteria for AD, neuroinflammation is increasingly recognized as an important factor in cognitive impairment. An increasing body of research underscores the significant relationship between neuroinflammation and cognitive decline [ 44 – 46 ]. Elevated plasma GAFP levels reflect astrocyte activation triggered by neuroinflammation [ 24 ]. Our findings show that plasma GFAP may distinguish the CU group from the MCI and AD groups and differentiate between the MCI and AD groups. These results suggest that GFAP could be a valuable plasma biomarker for AD screening prior to PET imaging. To our knowledge, no previous studies have yet assessed whether astrocytic biomarkers are associated with in vivo PET measurements of subcortical tau pathology in AD progression. Here, we show that increased mean tau SUVR in subcortical regions is associated with increased plasma GFAP levels in both MCI and AD groups. This finding supports the notion that astrocytosis, as measured by GFAP, is associated with tau pathology and that tau accumulation may trigger reactive astrocytes in AD. Previous studies have shown that significant associations between GFAP and amyloid pathology, which are stronger than associations with tau pathology [ 24 , 27 , 47 ]. In contrast, there was no statistically significant correlation between regional subcortical Aβ-PET load and plasma GFAP in our study cohort. In Pereira et al. study [ 27 ], plasma GFAP more closely associated with Aβ rather than tau in AD patients. The difference between our results and Pereira’s may be attributed to two factors: (1) the use of different Tau-PET tracers. We used 18 F-MK-6240 instead of 18 F-RO-948 that binding characteristics and distribution patterns are different. It has been reported that 18 F-RO-948 bind with neuromelanin [ 48 ], which could potentially impact accurate quantification in the AD relevant areas. (2) The differences may also due to ROI selection. Pereira et al. studied cortical Aβ and tau accumulation, while we focused on subcortical tau accumulation. Correlation analysis showed that increases in plasma GFAP and subcortical Tau-PET load in the MCI and AD groups were significantly associated with global cognitive impairment. These factors are more closely linked to the onset of abnormal Tau-PET and correlate better with Tau-PET than with Aβ-PET. Previous studies have suggested that astrocyte activation might promote or contribute to cognitive decline [ 24 , 49 ] Although plasma GFAP is not specific to AD pathology and can be observed in various neural system diseases, it reflects astrocyte activation triggered by neuroinflammation. Subcortical combined ROI and early detection of cognitive decline Our findings provide indirect evidence for the spread of subcortical tau into the cortex as the disease progresses. The topographic distribution of pathological tau deposits in the brain is crucial. Both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies have shown that the PET-based Braak staging framework closely resembles the Braak histopathologic staging [ 19 , 50 ]. However, Braak staging itself has limitations. It tends to under-represent regions that are clinically relevant in predicting disease progression and cognitive decline. Notably, we found that the putamen and pallidum, subcortical structures not included in Braak stages, were the regions where tau invades. This finding is supported by a recent study with Parkinson’s disease patients, which showed that tau accumulation in the substantia nigra and the putamen, both part of the basal ganglia [ 51 ]. Since tau accumulation is associated with dyskinesia and degeneration of dopamine-producing regions, interventions aimed at reducing tau accumulation may offer a new target for altering the trajectory of the disease and provide new perspectives for observing and treating AD. Post-mortem studies suggest that subcortical nuclei, rather than allocortical regions (such as trans-/entorhinal cortex), represent the earliest sites of tau-associated AD pathology [ 15 , 52 ] These studies indicate that abnormally phosphorylated tau initially appears in brainstem nuclei, including LC [ 12 – 17 ]. In vivo staging of tau deposition, as measured by PET, is analogous to established neuropathologic approaches for staging tau. Therefore, our findings underline the importance of investigating the impact of tau accumulation in subcortical structures. Tau deposition is a robust predictor of cognitive impairment in individuals on the AD pathway. However, one issue to consider is which tau regions to use for assessing cognitive decline. Some brain regions, e.g., the entorhinal cortex, are more likely to be affected in the early stages of the disease, but progress more slowly than others. In contrast, regions like the temporal lobe are more affected in the later stages of AD [ 50 , 53 ]. Our results suggest that subcortical Tau-PET load shows stronger associations with cognitive decline in the MCI group, and no statistically significant correlation in the AD group. This indicates that subcortical regions are not only sites of tau pathology associated with AD, but are also increasingly involved in the progression of the disease. Moreover, the inverse correlation between the mean tau SUVR in the subcortical combined ROI and cognitive function suggests that cognitive impairment may be associated with the spread of tau pathology to the subcortical structures. On the other hand, Aβ and tau deposition in the subcortical combined ROI are correlated to each other in the MCI group. The emergence of tau pathology in the AD brain is closely linked to brain regions implicated in cognitive impairment. While these regions may not be considered core regions of AD, they are critical for cognitive functions that are uniquely affected in AD. Therefore, our results suggest that the subcortical combined ROI may be a viable option for early detection of cognitive decline. The mean tau SUVR of the subcortical combined ROI could serve as a biomarker for the early detection of MCI. To support our finding, we further analyzed the diagnostic efficiency of the subcortical combined ROI in distinguishing MCI from AD. The combination of Tau-PET, Aβ-PET and plasma GFAP provided the highest area under the curve for identifying MCI among AD participants. Longitudinal assessment of subcortical tau burden and future cognitive decline in the same individuals will provide important and powerful validation of our results. Utilizing multi-modal imaging and biomarkers could enhance the detection ability compared to single-modal imaging. Our results may inform anti-tau therapeutic trials, as Tau-PET can identify individuals at risk of rapid cognitive decline. The inclusion of the Trailblazer-Alz study was based on Tau-PET staging [ 54 ]. These results highlight that in vivo subcortical tau staging using high-affinity Tau-PET tracers can provide a more comprehensive evaluation of tau deposition than simply classifying tau into positive and negative categories. An important aspect to assess in future studies is whether tau changes over time in the subcortical combined ROI can better predict conversion from MCI to AD dementia. This study had several limitations. First, only Aβ-PET positive subjects were enrolled that may limit the applicability of our conclusion to Aβ-negative population group. It is worth noting that MCI represents an important intermediate stage between preclinical AD and the dementia stage and amyloid-positive MCI patients have a significantly higher risk of converting to AD dementia compared to amyloid-negative patients [ 55 ]. Accurate prognostic assessment is especially pertinent in MCI stage that is an optimal phase for assessing the efficacy of disease-modifying interventions [ 56 , 57 ] For amyloid-targeted treatments, establishing prognostic factors for Aβ-positive MCI patients could provide a crucial risk stratification tool for decision making of the treatment. Therefore, our study was designed to address MCI or early stage of AD that is anticipated to yield more clinically meaningful effects [ 58 ]. However, neocortical tau has been observed in a proportion of Aβ-negative CN individuals [ 7 ]. Therefore, further studies involving tau-positive and Aβ-negative participants are needed for a comprehensive analysis and determine its influence on the model for predicting cognitive decline using subcortical ROI. Second, the relatively small sample size restricted the interpretation of our results and necessitates validation in other samples, despite our best efforts to recruit participants willing to undergo Aβ-PET, Tau-PET and plasma testing. In future studies, we plan to increase the sample size, include individuals with diverse Aβ and tau statuses, and conduct longitudinal follow-up studies with the MCI and AD groups. Conclusions In summary, our study demonstrated a close relationship between subcortical tau pathology and plasma GFAP in patients with MCI and AD. We found that hyperphosphorylation of tau in subcortical regions is an early event in AD, particularly in MCI. Our findings underscore the importance of including subcortical tau involvement in the biological staging scheme for Tau-PET, which could provide a potential biomarker for early detection of cognitive decline. Anti-tau trials should take into consideration the individual subcortical Tau-PET staging. Electronic supplementary material Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.