STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY Restricting the analysis to prospective cohort studies minimises potential biases, ensuring a more rigorous assessment of the association between dual sensory loss and dementia risk. The utilisation of a precise and clear definition of dementia as the outcome measure enhances the accuracy and consistency of the findings. The deliberate exclusion of definitions related to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) was purposeful, considering the potential for individuals with MCI to revert to normal cognition rather than progress to dementia. Our approach does not allow a statistical comparison against single sensory (visual or hearing) impairment. Potential small number of eligible studies due to strict eligible criteria. Background The prevalence of dementia is on the rise and is expected to triple by 2050, reaching 150 million cases globally. This surge in cases is anticipated to result in economic losses of up to $50 billion by 2030. Despite the significant impact of dementia, there is currently no definitive cure available. Focusing on preventable risk factors is paramount in managing cognitive impairment. Strong evidence has emerged supporting the importance of potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia. 1 2 Recent studies have established hearing loss as a modifiable risk factor for dementia, with a potential reduction in risk by 9%. As of 2019, an estimated 1.57 billion people globally were afflicted with hearing loss, which translates to approximately one in every five individuals. 2 3 Importantly, hearing loss can be reversed through interventions such as hearing aids and cochlear implants. 4 In parallel, vision impairment has been consistently linked with increased risks of cognitive impairment and dementia, as evidenced by both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. 5 Emerging evidence suggests that vision-preserving interventions, such as cataract extraction, may hold the potential to alter the risk of developing dementia. 6 7 In older adults, the risk of concurrent impairment in multiple senses is a notable concern. The World Federation of the Deafblind reports that the combined prevalence of vision and hearing loss in individuals aged 65 and older varies between 0.2% and 2%, with rates exceeding 5% in some groups. The Blue Mountains Hearing Study, which focused on adults aged 55 and above, revealed an overall prevalence of 6% for concurrent vision and hearing impairment, a figure that rises to 27% in individuals aged 80 and above. 8 However, the association between dual sensory impairment and the risk of dementia remains an area of uncertainty. Importantly, there appears to be a gap in the existing literature, with a lack of systematic reviews and meta-analyses specifically exploring this association. Therefore, the purpose of this protocol is to propose the design of a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the association of dual sensory impairment (hearing and vision) against no sensory impairment in adult population in the development of all-cause dementia and possible sources of heterogeneity influencing this relationship. 9 Methods This protocol is registered in PROSPERO International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (CRD42023493401) and follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. The final manuscript will be written in accordance with the methodological guidelines delineated in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 10 and with reporting based on the PRISMA recommendations. 11 12 Study selection criteria Type of studies We will include longitudinal cohort studies that report HRs and are conducted in adults (18 years and older). The studies must assess the association of acquired dual sensory impairment (both visual and auditory impairment) against no sensory impairment on the risk of all-cause dementia. We will include studies with well-described definition of dementia, whether based on clinical criteria, self-reported by a proxy respondent or determined by a specific battery of tests. Likewise, studies must have well-defined criteria for acquired dual sensory impairment (clinical or self-reported). In addition, we will restrict our eligibility criteria to studies written in either English, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese or French but will not restrict to geographic region, publication year or sample size. We will exclude studies performed on paediatric patients (under 18 years of age), patients with dementia at baseline (prevalent dementia), cross-sectional studies, case controls, case series, conference abstracts, book chapters and non-peer-reviewed articles. Search strategy and study selection We will systematically search two databases: MEDLINE-PubMed and Embase. Our search strategy will be developed with the assistance of a librarian and will include a combination of terms mainly as medical subject headings and title/abstract including terms related to visual, hearing and dual impairment combined with those related to dementia ( table 1 ). Table 1 Proposed search terms Theme Search term Sensory impairment (("Deaf-Blind Disorders"[Mesh] OR "dual sensory impair*"[tiab] OR "deaf blind"[tiab] OR "blind deaf"[tiab] OR "dual sensory loss"[tiab] OR "combined sight and hearing loss"[tiab]) OR(("Persons With Hearing Impairments"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Disorders"[Mesh:NoExp] OR "Hearing Loss"[Mesh:NoExp] OR "Deafness"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Loss, Bilateral"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Loss, High-Frequency"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Loss, Mixed Conductive-Sensorineural"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Loss, Sudden"[Mesh] OR "Hearing Loss, Unilateral"[Mesh] OR "hearing defect*"[tiab] OR "auditory disorder*"[tiab] OR "hearing disabilit*"[tiab])AND("Visually Impaired Persons"[Mesh] OR "Vision Disorders"[Mesh:NoExp] OR "Amblyopia"[Mesh] OR "Blindness"[Mesh:NoExp] OR "Blindness, Cortical"[Mesh] OR "Hemianopsia"[Mesh] OR "Scotoma"[Mesh] OR "Vision, Low"[Mesh] OR "vision loss"[tiab] OR "blindness"[tiab] OR "visual deficit*"[tiab] OR "vision disorder*"[tiab] OR "sight impairment"[tiab])) Dementia ("Dementia"[Mesh] OR Dementia*[tiab] OR Alzheimer disease[tiab] OR Alzheimer s disease[tiab] OR Lewy Bod*[tiab]) The articles will be exported from the databases and will be uploaded in a reference management software (Covidence) where the selection process will be conducted. First, we will remove any duplicates. Afterwards, six reviewers (AAA, AF, SG-L, SJ, JT and DU) will independently screen the list of articles by title and abstract, followed by full text based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The reviewers will be blinded to the decisions of other reviewers. Reasons for exclusion in full text will be recorded. Disagreements will be resolved by discussion and consensus among the reviewers. In addition to the articles retrieved by the search strategy, we will also review the reference lists of the included studies for relevant articles that might have been missed. Data extraction and preparation We will extract the following: (1) general information from the included articles (author and year of publication, journal name, country of study and funding); (2) methods (aim of the study, design, time of follow-up, inclusion and exclusion criteria, population setting and sample size); (3) exposure (definition of visual and hearing impairment, including severity); (4) outcome (definition of dementia diagnosis, including severity and type); (5) confounders (models and confounders adjusted); (6) baseline information (age and sex proportion for the normal sensory, dual-sensory impairment group and all); and (7) HRs and CIs from the most adjusted model. Data will be extracted using the reference management software (Covidence). Four reviewers will independently extract the data, and discrepancies will be resolved by discussion and consensus among all the reviewers. Data extracted will be compiled in Covidence and then exported in tabular form using a standard spreadsheet in Excel. In cases where information is missing, we will contact the authors via email to obtain the necessary details. Risk of bias assessment To assess the quality of the studies, we will employ the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for cohort studies. This tool evaluates three domains with some subcategories. First, the domain related to selection, which evaluates the representativeness of the exposed and non-exposed cohorts with respect to the average population, the ascertainment of the exposure and the confirmation that the outcome was not present at baseline. Second, the comparability domain that only has one subcategory related to how comparable are the cohorts. This domain evaluates if methods to control confounding were used. Finally, the domain related to the outcome with three subcategories: outcome ascertainment, adequacy of the follow-up period for the outcome to appear and the attrition rate. Each subdomain can receive one or zero stars (except for comparability which may receive up to two stars). The maximum overall is nine stars. The risk of bias assessment will be performed independently by two researchers (DU and SG-L). Discrepancies will be resolved by discussion and consensus. Risk of bias will be presented in a summary table, and patterns will be reported and discussed. In addition, we will perform sensitivity analysis to evaluate the robustness of our results by comparing the pooled effect sizes including and excluding the studies with low (≤4) and moderate (5–6) points in the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. The risk of bias will be also employed as assessment of the quality of evidence (see 13 Quality of the evidence section below). Statistical analysis and data synthesis We will perform a narrative summary and a table reporting the main characteristics of the included studies. In case a meta-analysis is possible (at least five studies), we will meta-analyse the HRs using DerSimonian-Laird random-effects models using the most adjusted model from each study. Heterogeneity between studies will be calculated with the I 2 and Cochrane’s Q test. The individual and pooled HR and 95% CI for dementia associated with dual sensory loss will be presented in a forest plot. Our descriptive analyses, data processing and statistical analyses will be conducted in STATA V.17 using the package metan. Assessment of heterogeneity We will explore possible sources of heterogeneity by performing subgroup analysis and meta-regression according to the type of the variable. We will perform subgroup analysis by sex, age subgroup (young adults: <65 years or old adults: ≥65), geographical location, study setting, years of follow-up (binary variable), dementia, visual and hearing impairment diagnosis ascertainment (clinical or self-reported), severity of dual sensory loss and dementia, subtypes of dementia (Alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, frontotemporal dementia and others) and based on the risk of bias. As meta-regressions, we will explore the influence of age, time of follow-up in years and the number of variables adjusted in the meta-analysed models. Whenever possible, we will evaluate the effect of each possible source of heterogeneity by estimating differences in the pooled HRs and their 95% CI. Analysis of sensitivity As part of the sensitivity analysis, we plan to include only high-quality studies based on the overall Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for cohort studies. Further, we will assess the influence of each individual study on the pooled effects using an influence plot and perform a cumulative meta-analysis to evaluate the effect of earliest studies. To account for death without dementia as a competing risk for dementia diagnosis, we will also conduct a sensitivity analysis on sub-HRs, cause-specific HRs, or time ratios, if reported in the studies. 14 Assessment of publication biases If sufficient studies are available, we will investigate the possibility of publication bias using Egger’s test and funnel plot. These results will be interpreted with caution, given the low power of these tests. Quality of the evidence The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology will be implemented to assess the quality and certainty of evidence. This methodology, along with the interpretation and conclusions, addresses the limitations, heterogeneity and quality of the data provided by the included studies. The pooled effect will be classified into one of the four GRADE levels (high, moderate, low or very low). They represent the level of confidence that the true effect lies close to the estimated pooled effect. Since we are including only prospective cohort studies (a type of observation study), our GRADE evaluation will start at a low level. Afterwards, we will assess five criteria that could downgrade even more the confidence level and three conditions that could upgrade it. The five downgrading criteria are as follows: (1) the individual study limitations assessed by the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for risk of bias in cohort studies, (2) the inconsistency of the results (measured by the presence of heterogeneity), (3) the indirectness of the evidence, (4) the imprecision of the estimate and (5) the publication bias. The three upgrading criteria are as follows: (1) presence of a dose-response gradient, (2) presence of a large magnitude of the effect and (3) control of potential confounders. Patient and public involvement Neither patients nor the public were involved in the design of this protocol. Ethics and dissemination This study does not require an ethics committee’s approval since there will not be human participants directly involved. Our results will be disseminated through publication in a peer-reviewed journal. Discussion Recent meta-analyses have revealed that single sensory impairments are linked to an increased risk of dementia. A meta-analysis focusing on prospective cohort studies suggests that hearing loss may independently elevate the risk of dementia. Similarly, visual impairment has been associated with increased risks of cognitive decline and dementia across cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. 15 6 Screening for sensory impairments, such as hearing loss, may emerge as a pivotal element in dementia prevention. This is especially pertinent given that adults aged 60 years and older often wait approximately 10 years before seeking consultation for their hearing issues. The WHO (2021) suggests hearing screening for adults starting at the age of 50, 16 with subsequent screenings every 5 years until the age of 64. Beyond 65 years, the screening frequency should be heightened to intervals of 1–3 years. In case of vision, screening in older adults is paramount to reduce visual disability burden. Prompt treatment interventions are crucial in the detection of hearing loss, and integrating visual impairment screening alongside hearing assessments is suggested. Despite these recommendations, there is currently a lack of evidence concerning the impact of hearing and/or visual screening, followed by intervention, on the reduction of dementia. Although this goes beyond the purpose of this study protocol, addressing the risk of dementia due to dual sensory impairment may contribute to the relocation of resources, reinforcing public initiatives of screening and developing interventions targeting both hearing and visual impairment to achieve dementia prevention. In fact, evidence indicates that the use of hearing devices such as hearing aids among individuals with hearing loss is associated with a 19% reduction in the hazards of long-term cognitive decline. 17 Additionally, interventions aimed at preserving vision, such as cataract extraction, may have the potential to modify the risk of developing dementia. 5 7 Consequently, this protocol aspires to advance our understanding of modifying risk factors of dementia to further develop effective preventive interventions in the population. This not only aims to determine the risk of all-cause dementia due to dual sensory (hearing and visual) impairment but also to comprehensively explore potential sources of heterogeneity, identify pertinent gaps in evidence and perform a qualitative comparison with previous studies evaluating single sensory impairment and dementia.