1 BACKGROUND Neuroimaging biomarkers are integral to the consensus recommendations of the National Institute on Aging‐Alzheimer's Association (NIA‐AA) for the diagnosis and characterization of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Despite these advancements, achieving early and precise diagnosis in clinical settings remains challenging. While structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) atrophy provides a sensitive biomarker for neuropathologic progression, it has limited sensitivity in detecting AD pathology in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or in the preclinical stages of the disease. 1 2 Early development of AD is marked by beta‐amyloid (Aβ) plaques accumulation alongside synaptic dysfunction, neuronal loss, and inflammation as evidenced by glial activation. Evidence from autopsy studies suggests that reductions in N‐acetylaspartate (NAA) and increases in myo‐inositol (mI)—markers of neuronal and glial metabolism, respectively, as measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)—correlate with Aβ plaque burden. 3 , 4 Sheikh‐Bahaei et al. demonstrated that Aβ‐positive regions show higher mI over creatine (mI/Cr) and lower NAA over creatine (NAA/Cr) ratios, with both metrics associated with Aβ levels. 5 Their findings suggest that mI/Cr could serve as a disease‐state biomarker, and NAA/Cr may reflect early neurodegenerative changes and could be a valuable surrogate marker for treatment response. However, these studies were constrained by single‐voxel MRS techniques with low spatial resolution (usually 20 × 20 × 20 mm 6 3 voxel size) and limited brain coverage, requiring over 5 min to scan a single voxel. Therefore, prior MRS studies in AD have primarily focused on the posterior cingulate gyrus/precuneus as the signature region of interest. , 7 , 8 , 9 This narrow focus may overlook important spatial variations in metabolite distribution across different regions affected by AD. 10 , 11 , 12 Moreover, it is suggested that changes in cortical neurometabolism associated with AD pathology predominantly manifest in gray matter regions. 13 , 14 , 15 Conventional MRS technology, constrained by its low spatial resolution and susceptibility to partial volume effects, struggles to measure tissue‐specific neurometabolite concentrations accurately. Therefore, the impact of Aβ on neuronal and glial metabolism across different regions and varying cognitive impairment levels remain unexplored. 16 In this study, we aimed to map the relationship between brain Aβ load and neurometabolism across a broad cognitive spectrum and at both global and regional levels. We utilized a novel fast, high‐resolution 3D magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) technique, known as SPICE (SPectroscopic Imaging by exploiting spatiospectral CorrElation). In an 8‐min scan, we obtained 3D maps of NAA, mI, and Cr at a nominal spatial resolution of 2 × 3 × 3 mm 3 (18 µL). , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 This allows for precise, tissue‐specific characterization of metabolic alterations in key cortical regions. Using a hybrid PET/MR system, we simultaneously acquired 3D MRSI and [ 23 18 F]florbetapir PET imaging data and evaluated how Aβ aggregation influences NAA and mI concentrations in the gray matter across the most susceptible cortical regions in cognitive normal (CN), MCI patients, and AD patients. 2 METHODS 2.1 Participants A total of 196 subjects were enrolled in this study. This cohort comprised 51 CN older adults, 69 individuals with MCI, and 76 patients diagnosed with AD. After scanning, a total of 22 subjects were excluded, including 4 who could not finish [ 18 F]florbetapir PET scanning, 2 Aβ‐positive healthy controls, and 16 subjects with poor image quality, including streaking and shadowing artifacts. As a result, a total of 174 subjects, as detailed in Table 1 , were used for data analysis. The participants were recruited from the aging study at Memory Clinic of Ruijin Hospital between January 2019 and November 2021. All participants underwent cognitive assessments with Mini‐Mental State Examination (MMSE), global Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), and other psychological tests. A consensus diagnosis was achieved by a panel of three experienced neurologists, according to the core clinical criteria described in the NIA‐AA criteria. , 24 CN had a CDR score of 0, MCI due to AD had a CDR score of 0.5, and AD had a CDR score of ≥1. Exclusion criteria included: (1) psychiatric or other neurological diseases; (2) pregnancy or renal failure; (3) major systemic disease; (4) history of traumatic brain injury; and (5) history of drug or alcohol addiction; (6) severe structural abnormality and lesions in the brain, such as tumor, infraction, hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, and so forth, detected by MRI imaging. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Ruijin Hospital, in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration and its later revised ethical standards. Written informed consents were provided by all participants or their designees. 25 RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review : Early and precise diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is essential but remains challenging. While focal correlations between amyloid‐β (Aβ) deposition and neurometabolism have been suggested through autopsy and single‐voxel magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI), the spatial relationship remains unexplored due to technical limitations. Interpretation : Utilizing a hybrid high‐resolution 3D MRSI‐positron emission tomography (MRSI‐PET) imaging approach, we identified significant global and region‐specific correlations between Aβ load and N‐acetylaspartate and myo‐inositol levels in 65 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 70 AD patients. Combined 3D MRSI and PET biomarkers yielded the highest diagnostic accuracy for MCI and AD. Future directions : This work provides novel insights into associations between Aβ and neurometabolism, demonstrating the potential of combined 3D MRSI and PET imaging to improve AD diagnosis. Future studies incorporating tau PET with 3D MRSI could provide further insights into the spatial distribution and associations between tau and neurometabolic changes. TABLE 1 Demographic characteristics of participants. Demographics CN ( n = 39) MCI ( n = 65) AD ( n = 70) p ‐Values Age, years 68 ± 6.24 69.75 ± 7.09 68.87 ± 7.26 0.46 Sex, female/male 21/18 36/29 32/38 0.5 Education, years 12.41 ± 3.16 12.11 ± 3.62 11.51 ± 3.2 0.36 CDR 0 0.5 1 ≥ / MMSE 29.38 ± 0.75 27.06 ± 1.78 a 19.09 ± 5.1 , a b <0.001 Global SUVR 0.95 ± 0.06 1.15 ± 0.24 a 1.32 ± 0.21 , a b <0.001 Aβ status, Aβ‐/Aβ+ 39/0 35/30 14/56 / Abbreviations: Aβ‐, Aβ‐negative; Aβ, amyloid‐β; Aβ+, Aβ‐positive; AD, Alzheimer's disease; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; CN, cognitively normal; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio. Data are expressed as the mean ± SD or n. a Significantly different from CN, p < 0.01. b Significantly different from MCI, p < 0.01. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 2.2 Data acquisition MRI/MRSI and PET images were acquired simultaneously using a 3T Biograph mMR hybrid PET/MR system (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany), equipped with a 12‐channel phase‐array head coil. Subjects were instructed to lie supine and remain awake with eyes closed during the scan. The acquisition scheme is displayed in Figure S1 . All subjects received a bolus injection of [ 18 F]florbetapir using a mean dose of 234.8 ± 37.5 (range 148–333 MBq) and waited for 45–60 min before they underwent PET/MR scanning. PET data were acquired in sinogram mode (15‐min duration) simultaneously with T1‐weighted MRI (5:04 min) and MRSI (8 min). Additional MR imaging was performed after MRSI, including fluid‐attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), T2‐weigted imaging (T2WI), susceptibility‐weighted imaging (SWI), and diffusion‐weighted imaging (DWI). The parameters are detailed in Table S1 . These sequences were used to exclude subjects with severe structural abnormalities, including tumors, infarctions, hemorrhages, and traumatic brain injuries. Specifically, DWI ruled out acute infarctions, while SWI was used to assess microhemorrhagic disease. Attenuation corrections were performed with an additional model‐based bone compartment using a Dixon MRI sequence. The PET images (matrix size = 344 × 344 × 127, voxel size = 2.1 × 2.1 × 2 mm 26 3 ) were reconstructed using ordered subset expectation maximization algorithm and smoothed with a 2‐mm full‐width half‐maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. The T1‐weighted images were acquired using the magnetization‐prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence: repetition time (TR) = 1900 ms, echo time (TE) = 2.44 ms, flip angle: 9°, field of view (FOV) = 250 × 250 × 192 mm 3 , voxel size = 0.977 × 0.977 × 1 mm 3 , scan time = 5 min 4 s. 3D 1 H‐MRSI data were acquired using the SPICE sequence with the following parameters: FOV = 240 × 240 × 72 mm 3 , matrix size = 122 × 78 × 24, voxel size = 2 × 3 × 3 mm 3 , TR = 160 ms, TE = 1.6 ms, flip angle = 27°, echo space = 1.76 ms, scan time = 8 min. Specifically, the echo space here refers to the time between consecutive echoes (δt) in the echo‐planar spectroscopic imaging (EPSI) trajectory. FIGURE 1 High‐resolution 3D MRSI and [ 18 F]Florbetapir PET images. High‐resolution 3D NAA and mI maps, along with [ 18 F]Flobetapir PET images, were simultaneously acquired using a hybrid PET/MR scanner for a CN subject, a MCI patient, and an AD patient. The superimposition of these metabolite maps onto anatomical data allows for precise delineation of anatomical information. Representative spectra sampled from the posterior cingulate cortex (green), precuneus (blue), and lateral parietal cortex (red) show notable reduction in NAA and elevation in mI in the AD patient. The color bar for MRSI shows NAA and mI levels in arbitrary institutional units (a.u.). AD, Alzheimer's disease; CN, cognitively normal; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; mI, myo‐inositol; MR, magnetic resonance; MRSI, magnetic resonance spectroscopy imaging; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate; PET, positron emission tomography; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio. 2.3 Image processing The 1 H‐MRSI data processing was performed following the latest SPICE processing pipeline. , 20 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 Specifically, the spatiospectral function, which contains information about different molecules, was reconstructed from the MRSI data using a union‐of‐subspaces model that incorporates pre‐learned spectral basis functions. Subject head motion and magnetic field drift occurring during the scan were identified and corrected utilizing embedded navigator signals. Field inhomogeneity and susceptibility effects were corrected using the high‐resolution field map derived from the accompanying water signals. Considering the spatial‐dependent and subject‐dependent variations in B 31 1 inhomogeneity due to coil loading effects, we applied an internal normalization of metabolite concentrations (i.e., metabolic ratios) to compare metabolic levels among participants. In this study, Cr was used as the internal reference. We confirmed that Cr levels did not significantly differ between the CN, MCI, and AD groups in our cohort. For region‐level analysis, T1‐weighted images were processed using FreeSurfer 6.0 for brain tissue segmentation for each subject. The Desikan‐Killiany atlas was utilized to parcellate cortical gray matter and white matter tissues. Six regions of interest (ROIs) were selected, including frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus, lateral parietal cortex, and lateral temporal cortex. ROIs were selected based on established Aβ‐PET literature, targeting regions with pronounced amyloid deposition that align with standard [ 32 18 F]florbetapir standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) calculation protocols. , 33 , 34 Notably, leveraging the high‐resolution capability of SPICE MRSI, we selected the posterior cingulate cortex and the precuneus as separate ROIs, rather than combining them, as is common in single‐voxel MRS studies. This distinction allowed us to conduct a more detailed investigation on these critical regions. An average neurometabolic level was calculated by averaging the neurometabolic ratios across the six ROIs, with each ROI contributing equally (1/6). This approach ensures that smaller ROIs critical to early AD pathology (e.g., precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex) contributed equally to the global measure. SUVR maps of [ 35 18 F]florbetapir were generated using the entire cerebellum as the reference region. PET images and tissue masks were then co‐registered to MRSI images to calculate the regional mean SUVR in the six ROIs that overlap with the MRSI ROIs. To achieve precise alignment between MRSI data and anatomical structures, we utilized unsuppressed water‐MRSI images acquired concurrently with metabolite data. These water images offer enhanced tissue contrast and were obtained at higher resolutions, facilitating more accurate co‐registration with T1‐weighted images. To match the in‐plane resolution of the T1‐weighted images, we applied zero‐filling interpolation to the water‐MRSI data. Following interpolation, we co‐registered the high‐resolution water‐MRSI images to the corresponding T1‐weighted images using rigid body transformation implemented in the advanced normalization tools (ANTs). ROI masks derived from FreeSurfer‐based T1‐weighted parcellation were aligned with MRSI images using the inverse transformation matrix and B‐spline resampling. The process of MRSI images co‐registration is added in Figure 36 S2 . PET images were also co‐registered to T1‐weighted images using rigid transformation implemented in ANTs to calculate the global Aβ‐PET SUVR. Co‐registration accuracy was confirmed through visual inspection of anatomical consistency between T1‐weighted and metabolites images. The global Aβ deposition was measured by calculating the weighted average of SUVR values across the frontal, cingulate, lateral parietal, and lateral temporal cortices. , 34 The patient groups were further dichotomized by Aβ using a previously established SUVR cut‐off at 1.11 to test the differences between controls and Aβ‐positive patients grouped by MCI and AD. 37 35 2.4 Statistical analysis Participant demographics were compared across diagnostic groups using chi‐squared tests for categorical measures and analysis of variance with post‐hoc Tukey tests for non‐categorical measures. Group differences of neurometabolic levels in each region were evaluated by analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with age, sex, and education as covariates. The assumption of normality was evaluated by Shapiro‐Wilk tests. Nonparametric ANCOVA analysis was performed when the residual was departing from normality. To correct for multiple comparisons, false discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied using Benjamini–Hochberg method. Additionally, the Bonferroni correction was used for the post‐hoc pairwise comparisons. We also performed voxel‐wise correlation analysis between neurometabolites and Aβ deposition using biological parametric mapping (BPM) across the entire overlapping grey matter. Specifically, the MRSI and Aβ‐PET images were normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space, quality controlled (e.g., excluding subjects with field‐of‐view deviations), smoothed using an 8 mm full‐width at half‐maximum Gaussian kernel, and transformed into z ‐scores to represent the levels of neurometabolic alteration and amyloid deposition. To assess the association between neurometabolic levels and Aβ deposition, partial correlation analyses were conducted, adjusting for age, sex, and education. Statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 21 (SPSS 21). In Aβ‐positive patients, we further performed canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to identify topographical associations between Aβ deposition (regional SUVRs) and neurometabolite ratios (NAA/Cr, mI/Cr), which is complementary to regional colocalization findings. We used the mean values of SUVR and neurometabolic ratios (NAA/Cr or mI/Cr) from six ROIs as input variables. Two matrices were constructed: X (regional SUVR values) and Y (regional neurometabolite ratios, NAA/Cr or mI/Cr), each structured as an N × P matrix (N: number of Aβ‐positive patients, P: number of ROIs). CCA maximizes Pearson's correlation (ρ) between the linear combinations U = Xa and V = Yb , where a and b are canonical vectors (weights assigned to each ROI). These vectors define the Aβ and neurometabolite topographies driving the multivariate association. The weight vectors, or canonical vectors, delineate the topographies of Aβ deposition and neurometabolites. , 38 , 39 40 To evaluate the discriminative potential of MRSI data across diagnostic groups, we used Bayesian logistic regression with varying numbers of input variables, implemented using the Bayesreg toolbox in MATLAB. Specifically, we calculated the neurometabolic ratios for each region and added them sequentially to the model. For each iteration, we computed the widely applicable information criterion (WAIC) values, which balance goodness‐of‐fit against model complexity. 41 The final model, with the lowest WAIC value, was selected, and the combination of measurements in this model was defined as the composite neurometabolic profile. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis, with 1000 bootstraps, was performed to compare classifiers based on the area under the curve (AUC). 42 3 RESULTS 3.1 Demographics Demographic characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Diagnostic groups did not differ in age, sex, or education. After stratifying patient groups based on Aβ status (MCI‐, MCI+, AD‐, AD+), no significant differences were found in age ( p = 0.36), sex ( p = 0.14), or education ( p = 0.73) among different patient groups and CN. Representative high‐resolution 3D MRSI maps of NAA and mI and the corresponding [ 18 F]Florbetapir PET images are shown in Figure 1 . Representative spectra were sampled from the posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus, and lateral parietal cortex, respectively. A noticeable global reduction in NAA and elevation in mI could be observed in the AD patient, which coincide with increased Aβ deposition. 3.2 Associations of brain Aβ with NAA/Cr levels Associations between Aβ‐PET SUVR and NAA/Cr levels were investigated by including all participants and adjusting for age, sex, and education in regression analysis (Figure 2 ). Across all ROIs, we found a significant negative association between average SUVR and NAA/Cr ( r = −0.28, P < 0.001). Regionally, NAA/Cr was negatively correlated with Aβ‐PET SUVR in the frontal cortex ( corrected r = −0.27, P < 0.001), anterior cingulate cortex ( corrected r = −0.17, P = 0.045), and precuneus ( corrected r = −0.22, P = 0.008). After further adjusting for clinical diagnosis (normal vs disease, the average association with NAA/Cr became non‐significant ( corrected r = −0.13, P = 0.19), though regional associations remained significant in the frontal cortex ( corrected r = −0.21, P = 0.025). FDR corrections were applied for multiple comparisons (14 tests across 2 neurometabolic ratios and 7 regions). corrected FIGURE 2 Correlations between neurometabolic levels and Aβ deposition. Regional (A) and average (B) correlations of Aβ SUVR with NAA/Cr and mI/Cr levels. Associations were tested simultaneously in cognitively normal (light dot) and disease (dark dot) groups. The fitted lines are from linear regression models, co‐varied for age, sex, and education. The data in the top of each panel are the partial correlation coefficients r and p ‐values for Aβ SUVR in the partial correlation models fitted for all subjects simultaneously. All reported p ‐values were FDR corrected for multiple comparisons (14 tests across 2 neurometabolic ratios and 7 regions). P < 0.05 was considered significant and shown in red. Aβ, amyloid‐β; Cr, creatine; FDR, false discovery rate; mI, myo‐inositol; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio. corrected We compared neurometabolic levels between CN and MCI+ and AD+. In accordance with the Aβ cascade hypothesis and the dynamic biomarker model, MCI‐ are likely to represent non‐AD cases, and AD‐ were thought to have less AD‐like characteristics, and these groups were also compared with CN. NAA/Cr levels exhibited significant differences across the five groups stratified by Aβ status in all ROIs (frontal cortex, 43 P = 0.032; anterior cingulate cortex, corrected P = 0.008; posterior cingulate cortex, corrected P < 0.001; precuneus, corrected P < 0.001; lateral parietal cortex, corrected P = 0.019; lateral temporal cortex, corrected P = 0.02). FDR corrections were applied for multiple comparisons (15 tests involving 2 neurometabolic ratios, 7 regions, and average SUVR). In corrected post‐hoc pair‐wise comparisons, NAA/Cr was significantly reduced in the AD+ patients compared to CN in all regions (frontal cortex, P = 0.039; anterior cingulate cortex, corrected P = 0.001; posterior cingulate cortex, corrected P < 0.001; precuneus, corrected P < 0.001; lateral parietal cortex, corrected P = 0.011; lateral temporal cortex, corrected P = 0.034; Table corrected 2 and Figure 3 ). In AD‐ patients, NAA/Cr was significantly reduced only in the posterior cingulate cortex compared to CN ( P = 0.02). Compared to MCI+, NAA/Cr was significantly lower in the precuneus of AD+ patients ( corrected P = 0.013). Average NAA/Cr was significantly reduced in AD+ patients versus CN ( corrected P < 0.001). All reported corrected post‐hoc P ‐values were Bonferroni‐corrected (10 group‐wise comparisons). TABLE 2 Comparisons of neurometabolic levels between groups categorized by Aβ status. Parameter Brain region Group CN MCI+ AD+ MCI‐ AD‐ NAA/Cr Frontal cortex 1.19 ± 0.07 1.16 ± 0.06 1.15 ± 0.08 a 1.17 ± 0.06 1.13 ± 0.07 Anterior cingulate cortex 1.18 ± 0.11 1.14 ± 0.1 1.1 ± 0.11 b 1.13 ± 0.1 1.11 ± 0.11 Posterior cingulate cortex 1.33 ± 0.08 1.28 ± 0.08 1.25 ± 0.09 c 1.26 ± 0.11 1.22 ± 0.1 a Precuneus 1.31 ± 0.09 1.29 ± 0.09 1.22 ± 0.09 , c d 1.27 ± 0.12 1.24 ± 0.09 Lateral parietal cortex 1.27 ± 0.07 1.27 ± 0.08 1.22 ± 0.08 a 1.26 ± 0.09 1.22 ± 0.09 Lateral temporal cortex 1.23 ± 0.09 1.21 ± 0.07 1.19 ± 0.07 a 1.23 ± 0.06 1.19 ± 0.11 Average 1.25 ± 0.06 1.22 ± 0.05 1.19 ± 0.06 c 1.22 ± 0.06 1.19 ± 0.06 mI/Cr Frontal cortex 0.95 ± 0.05 0.96 ± 0.04 0.97 ± 0.05 0.95 ± 0.06 1 ± 0.06 Anterior cingulate cortex 0.88 ± 0.07 0.89 ± 0.07 0.88 ± 0.08 0.88 ± 0.08 0.94 ± 0.09 Posterior cingulate cortex 0.88 ± 0.06 0.9 ± 0.08 0.93 ± 0.07 c 0.88 ± 0.06 0.91 ± 0.08 Precuneus 0.8 ± 0.04 0.83 ± 0.05 b 0.86 ± 0.06 c 0.81 ± 0.06 0.83 ± 0.04 Lateral parietal cortex 0.79 ± 0.04 0.81 ± 0.05 0.84 ± 0.06 , c d 0.8 ± 0.04 0.82 ± 0.05 Lateral temporal cortex 0.84 ± 0.03 0.86 ± 0.05 0.88 ± 0.05 c 0.86 ± 0.04 0.89 ± 0.05 Average 0.86 ± 0.03 0.88 ± 0.04 0.9 ± 0.04 c 0.86 ± 0.04 0.9 ± 0.05 Note : The p ‐values from post hoc comparisons were corrected using the Bonferroni method. Abbreviations: Aβ, amyloid‐β; AD‐, Aβ‐negative Alzheimer's disease; AD+, Aβ‐positive Alzheimer's disease; CN, cognitively normal; Cr, creatine; MCI‐, Aβ‐negative mild cognitive impairment; MCI+, Aβ‐positive mild cognitive impairment; mI, myo‐inositol; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate. a Significantly different from CN, P < 0.05. corrected b Significantly different from CN, P < 0.01. corrected c Significantly different from CN, P < 0.001. corrected d Significantly different from MCI+, P < 0.05. corrected John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. FIGURE 3 Effects of Aβ deposition and diagnostic group on neurometabolic levels. Comparisons of neurometabolic levels were performed between diagnostic groups stratified by Aβ positivity, dichotomized by SUVR 1.11. Boxplots display the median ± interquartile range, with whiskers representing the minimum and maximum values. The values presented above each column are ≥ p ‐values obtained from post‐hoc comparisons for each group to the CN group. The values presented below each column are p ‐values obtained from post‐hoc comparisons between the AD+ and MCI+ groups. All reported post‐hoc P ‐values were Bonferroni‐corrected (10 group‐wise comparisons). Only the p ‐values surviving Bonferroni correction are shown. AD‐, Aβ‐negative Alzheimer's disease; AD+, Aβ‐positive Alzheimer's disease; Aβ, amyloid‐β; CN, cognitively normal; Cr, creatine; MCI‐, Aβ‐negative mild cognitive impairment; MCI+, Aβ‐positive mild cognitive impairment; mI, myo‐inositol; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio. The results of voxel‐wise correlations are shown in Figure S3 . The regions with significant correlations (e.g., frontal lobe, anterior cingulate, and precuneus) align with our ROI‐based findings. Additionally, negative NAA/Cr‐Aβ correlations were found in the middle temporal gyrus. 3.3 Associations of brain Aβ with mI/Cr levels The average mI/Cr showed a significant positive correlation with average SUVR ( r = 0.32, P < 0.001), which remained significant after adjusting for clinical diagnosis ( corrected r = 0.21, P = 0.023). Regionally, mI/Cr was positively correlated with Aβ‐PET SUVR in the posterior cingulate cortex ( corrected r = 0.21, P = 0.012), precuneus ( corrected r = 0.38, P < 0.001), lateral parietal cortex ( corrected r = 0.35, P < 0.001), and lateral temporal cortex ( corrected r = 0.24, P = 0.002). After adjusting for clinical diagnosis, these associations remained significant in the precuneus ( corrected r = 0.27, P < 0.001) and lateral parietal cortex ( corrected r = 0.24, P = 0.007). FDR corrections were applied for multiple comparisons (14 tests across 2 neurometabolic ratios and 7 regions). corrected The mI/Cr level exhibited significant differences across groups categorized by Aβ status in all studied ROIs (frontal cortex, P = 0.02; posterior cingulate cortex, corrected P = 0.002; precuneus, corrected P < 0.001; lateral parietal cortex, corrected P < 0.001; lateral temporal cortex, corrected P = 0.002), except for the anterior cingulate cortex ( corrected P = 0.27). FDR corrections were applied for multiple comparisons (15 tests involving 2 neurometabolic ratios across 7 regions and average SUVR). In corrected post‐hoc pairwise comparisons, mI/Cr was significantly increased in AD+ patients compared to CN in most regions (posterior cingulate cortex, P < 0.001; precuneus, corrected P < 0.001; lateral parietal cortex, corrected P < 0.001; lateral temporal cortex, corrected P < 0.001). mI/Cr was increased only in the precuneus ( corrected P = 0.008) for MCI+ patients compared to CN group. Moreover, mI/Cr significantly increased in the lateral parietal cortex of AD+ patients compared to MCI+ patients ( corrected P = 0.024). When considering average mI/Cr, there was a significant increase in AD+ patients compared to CN ( corrected P < 0.001). All reported corrected post‐hoc P ‐values were Bonferroni‐corrected for 10 group‐wise comparisons. As displayed in Figure S3 , the results of voxel‐wise correlations align with our ROI‐based findings (e.g., positive mI/Cr–Aβ correlations in the precuneus, posterior cingulate, and parietal/middle temporal cortices) but also reveal novel associations (e.g., in the inferior frontal gyrus). 3.4 Associations of brain Aβ and neurometabolites topographies in Aβ positive patients The association between Aβ‐PET and neurometabolites topographies was directly compared using CCA. The topographies of Aβ and neurometabolites were characterized using the first canonical mode (Figure 4 ). Figure 4 displays the weights of SUVR and neurometabolic ratios for each region. The weights are color‐coded, with higher absolute values indicating contributions to the association. The first canonical mode (highest ρ) is identified. The analysis revealed that distinct Aβ topographies correlate with specific neurometabolite distributions. This enables bidirectional estimation: Aβ severity predicts neurometabolite changes, and vice versa. For Aβ and NAA/Cr, it explained 53% of the covariance in the data. For Aβ and mI/Cr, it explained 43% of the covariance. The weighted and averaged levels of NAA/Cr and mI/Cr with Aβ‐PET SUVR values according to these topographies were significantly correlated (NAA/Cr: r = 0.5, p < 0.001; mI/Cr: r = 0.39, p < 0.001), which reflects the robust relationship between neurometabolites and Aβ when the appropriate topographies are considered. The NAA/Cr topography in frontal and parietal cortices demonstrated the highest correlation with Aβ topography in cingulate and frontal cortex. The mI/Cr topography in parietal cortex and temporal cortex exhibited the highest correlation with Aβ topography in parietal cortex. FIGURE 4 Brain Aβ deposition and neurometabolites topographies are associated in Aβ positive patients. (A) Topographies for NAA/Cr and Aβ‐PET SUVR derived from canonical correlations that maximize the correlation between NAA/Cr and Aβ deposition. (B) Topographies for mI/Cr and Aβ‐PET SUVR derived from canonical correlations that maximize the correlation between mI/Cr and Aβ deposition. Aβ, amyloid‐β; Cr, creatine; mI, myo‐inositol; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate; PET, positron emission tomography; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio. 3.5 Discrimination between diagnostic groups using Aβ and neurometabolite biomarkers We assessed the classification performance of Aβ and neurometabolites biomarkers obtained from 3D MRSI/PET imaging across diagnostic groups. Table 3 and Figure 5 compare the classification accuracy of composite neurometabolite measures against traditional single‐region (precuneus) neurometabolite metrics, as well as global Aβ‐PET SUVR. The composite neurometabolites demonstrated improved group separation compared to precuneus‐based measures. Specifically, composite neurometabolites achieved an AUC of 0.74 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.63–0.83, WAIC = 65.89) for distinguishing MCI from CN, performing comparably to SUVR (AUC = 0.79, 95% CI = 0.69–0.86; WAIC = 53.71). Notably, combining composite neurometabolites with SUVR further improved differentiation between MCI and CN (AUC = 0.86, 95% CI = 0.77–0.92; WAIC = 52.28). For differentiating AD from CN, composite neurometabolites achieved an AUC of 0.9 (95% CI = 0.83–0.94; WAIC = 47.31), while SUVR yielded an AUC of 0.97 (95% CI = 0.92‐0.99; WAIC = 23.69). Combining composite neurometabolites with SUVR provided the highest classification accuracy for AD versus CN (AUC = 0.98, 95% CI = 0.94–1; WAIC = 22.76). Moreover, we conducted additional classification analyses to assess the ability of composite neurometabolites to differentiate MCI‐ from CN, AD‐ from CN, and AD‐ from MCI‐. As displayed in Figure S4 and Table S2 ), our findings indicate that composite neurometabolites outperformed global Aβ‐PET SUVR in all comparisons (e.g., AUC = 0.7 vs. 0.61 for MCI‐ vs. CN; AUC = 0.9 vs. 0.86 for AD‐ vs. CN; AUC = 0.77 vs. 0.75 for AD‐ vs. MCI‐). These results highlight MRSI's potential to enhance differentiation, particularly when Aβ pathology alone is insufficient. TABLE 3 Classification performance between different groups by Bayesian logistic regression. Parameter Measures AUC WAIC MCI versus CN Precuneus NAA/Cr 0.58 69.63 Precuneus mI/Cr 0.63 69.06 Composite MRSI 0.74 65.89 Global Aβ‐PET SUVR 0.79 53.71 Composite MRSI + Global Aβ‐PET SUVR 0.86 52.28 AD versus CN Precuneus NAA/Cr 0.75 62 Precuneus mI/Cr 0.78 59.17 Composite MRSI 0.9 47.31 Global Aβ‐PET SUVR 0.97 23.69 Composite MRSI + Global Aβ‐PET SUVR 0.98 22.76 Abbreviations: Aβ, amyloid‐β; AD, Alzheimer's disease; AUC, area under the curve; CN, cognitively normal; Cr, creatine; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; mI, myo‐inositol; MRSI, magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate; PET, positron emission tomography; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio; WAIC, widely applicable information criterion. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. FIGURE 5 ROC curves comparing the performance of precuneus neurometabolites, composite neurometabolites, global Aβ‐PET SUVR, and the combined MRSI and global Aβ‐PET SUVR in classifying MCI from CN and AD from CN. Shaded areas indicate the 95% confidence intervals. The AUC values with 95% confidence intervals are provided in the legend. Aβ, amyloid‐β; AD, Alzheimer's disease; AUC, area under the curve; CN, cognitively normal; CN, cognitively normal; Cr, creatine; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; mI, myo‐inositol; MRSI, magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging; NAA, N‐acetylaspartate; PET, positron emission tomography; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio. 4 DISCUSSION In this prospective study, we investigated the relationship between Aβ deposition and neuronal and glial metabolism in AD at global, regional, and topographic levels using hybrid 3D MRSI‐PET imaging. We demonstrated the feasibility and clinical potential of fast, high‐resolution 3D MRSI for capturing tissue‐specific neurometabolic changes in MCI and AD patients. Integrating 3D MRSI into AD diagnosis could provide valuable neurometabolic biomarkers in routine clinical practice, enhancing MRI's sensitivity for detecting AD‐related alterations and providing a more comprehensive assessment of the disease. Our analysis focuses on the gray matter of distinct cortical regions vulnerable to AD. On the PET side, it is important to note that florbetapir binding is known to be nonspecific in white matter. Consequently, studies employing [ 18 F]Florbetapir PET typically concentrate on gray matter exclusively. , 44 From the MRSI perspective, prior research has consistently highlighted that altered neurometabolism in the gray matter of cortical regions, as opposed to white matter, is closely linked to AD pathology. For instance, Schuff et al. demonstrated reduced NAA concentration in the gray matter of parietal and temporal lobes in AD patients, with no such effect observed in white matter. 45 Schreiner et al., utilizing 7T MRSI, found that decreased episodic memory performance in cognitive tasks correlated with higher NAA levels in gray matter, suggesting increased mitochondrial energy capacity. 14 Furthermore, the association between higher mI/NAA ratios and Aβ deposition was predominantly observed in gray matter, particularly in the posterior cingulate and precuneus, with no such association evident in white matter. 15 16 Our findings revealed a significant association between global mI/Cr levels and Aβ deposition in AD‐vulnerable cortical regions across the entire cohort of CN, MCI, and AD subjects. This suggests a continuous association between mI and Aβ throughout the AD continuum, potentially even in the early asymptomatic stage. Myo‐inositol is synthesized in glial cells, and its increased levels are indicative of glial cell proliferation and content. Histopathology studies have confirmed the presence of these proliferated glial cells in close proximity to Aβ plaques, which supports our findings about a global correlation between mI and Aβ deposition. At a regional level, we observed an increased mI/Cr in the precuneus of individuals when comparing MCI+ with CNs. Moreover, mI levels showed a progressive rise from MCI+ to AD+ groups in the lateral parietal cortex. Both regions exhibited positive correlations between mI/Cr and Aβ deposition. Previous studies combining MRS and histopathological results indicated that mI/Cr in precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex is associated with both neuritic and diffuse Aβ plaques in autopsy samples. 46 , 4 Similarly, CN individuals showed correlations between mI/Cr in the posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus and cortical Aβ uptake tracers, although limited by single‐voxel MRS imaging and partial volume effects. 5 , 7 Tissue‐specific associations between Aβ and neurometabolism have been demonstrated using 7T MRI, with higher mI/NAA ratios linked to Aβ in the gray matter of posterior cingulate and precuneus. 47 The precuneus, one of the first regions to accumulate Aβ, might exhibit AD‐typical neurometabolic changes even with minimal regional Aβ deposits. In the AD+ group, increased mI/Cr levels were observed across temporal‐parietal cortical regions, consistent with prior literature. The high‐resolution imaging capability of our 3D MRSI technology effectively distinguishes posterior cingulate cortex from precuneus, revealing an early increase in mI levels in precuneus followed by posterior cingulate cortex, lateral parietal cortex, and lateral temporal cortex regions. 16 We observed a decrease in NAA/Cr levels across all six regions with Aβ deposition in AD patients. NAA, an amino acid synthesized primarily in neuron mitochondria, serves as a marker for neuroaxonal viability, function, and density, showing reductions in various AD‐affected brain areas. In our study, a global association between NAA/Cr levels and Aβ‐PET SUVR was found, consistent with histopathology data demonstrating a significant association between NAA and neurotic Aβ plaques. Our data also imply that the presence of cognitive impairment may partly mediate the NAA‐Aβ association, suggesting that Aβ’s impact on NAA involves early neurodegeneration rather than just Aβ deposition. This is supported by progressive NAA/Cr reduction between MCI+ and AD+ patients, not mirrored by Aβ‐PET SUVR. The evolving NAA/Cr changes between MCI+ and AD+ patients indicate the potential of NAA/Cr as a sensitive measure for detecting and tracking neurodegeneration's course. Our findings align with previous studies demonstrating longitudinal NAA/Cr reduction in both MCI and AD, correlating with cognitive decline. , 48 Given NAA's sensitivity to neurodegeneration and clinical progression, NAA/Cr might have the potential to serve as a disease staging biomarker and monitor treatment responses in future targeted therapy trials. 49 We also analyzed glutamate and glutamine (pooled as Glx)/Cr ratios across diagnostic groups and their association with Aβ deposition (Tables S3 and S4 ). No significant differences or correlations were observed, aligning with mixed findings in the literature. For instance, while some studies report reduced Glx in specific regions (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex, hippocampus, posterior cingulate cortex, and precuneus), , 50 others show no changes or correlations with Aβ deposition. 51 , 52 Technical challenges, such as the difficulty in disentangling glutamate and glutamine signals (which may covary inversely), further complicate interpretation. This heterogeneity likely explains the lack of consensus on Glx's clinical relevance in AD. 53 Our study has several limitations. First, a notable limitation is the absence of tau PET imaging. Previous research suggests a potential relationship between NAA/Cr levels and early tau‐mediated processes in AD using histological studies. To further explore this, future studies integrating tau PET imaging with 3D MRSI could provide valuable insights into the spatial distribution and tissue‐specific associations between tau accumulation and NAA levels. Second, longitudinal studies have shown that neurometabolic markers can predict the progression from CN to MCI. 5 , 10 Consistent with these findings, our study observed a significant reduction in NAA/Cr in the posterior cingulate cortex and an increase in mI/Cr in the precuneus in MCI+ compared to CN individuals. We also found significant correlations between NAA/Cr, mI/Cr, and Aβ‐PET SUVR in these regions. However, our study's lack of follow‐up data prevents us from addressing disease progression predictions. To validate and extend these findings, longitudinal studies with follow‐up assessments are essential. Third, previous studies suggest that elevated mI/Cr levels are associated with preclinical pathological processes. 54 However, the limited number of Aβ+ CN subjects in our cohort (only two) precluded meaningful statistical analysis. Additionally, participants in this study were limited to an East Asian population, which restricts the generalizability of the results. Future studies should include amyloid‐positive CN subjects, individuals with non‐AD dementias, longitudinal data, and more diverse populations to further validate our findings and assess the specificity of neurometabolic markers to AD, extending their relevance beyond the current cohort. Moreover, we used Cr as a reference to calculate relative metabolite concentrations. Although we have confirmed that Cr did not differ significantly in the selected ROIs across groups, it is still a suboptimal choice of internal reference. To address this problem, we are actively developing an enhanced version of SPICE that enables absolute quantification by incorporating B 47 1 +/B 1 ‐ field mapping and water T1 correction. This approach leverages rapidly acquired (∼1 min) navigators with variable flip angles to correct for spatial inhomogeneities and improve the accuracy of metabolite quantification. Once fully developed, we plan to integrate this method into future large‐scale clinical studies to further validate its robustness and clinical utility. Despite these limitations, our study establishes significant links between brain metabolites and Aβ measurements, highlighting the potential of 3D high‐resolution MRSI in early AD detection, monitoring disease progression, and assessing treatment responses in future clinical trials. In summary, we utilized a hybrid high‐resolution 3D MRSI/Aβ‐PET imaging approach to investigate neuronal and glial metabolism changes in AD‐susceptible cortical regions associated with Aβ accumulation in MCI and AD. Our findings show significant correlations between Aβ load and both mI/Cr and NAA/Cr ratios, with distinctive regional patterns. These neurometabolic markers, mapped across cortical topographies, providing insights into Aβ’s impact on neuronal and glial metabolism and highlight the potential to improve AD diagnosis using combined high‐resolution 3D MRSI and PET imaging. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors report no competing interests. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting Information . CONSENT STATEMENT Written informed consent was obtained from all participants in this study. Supporting information