INTRODUCTION Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a transitional state between normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) ( McKhann et al., 2011 ). Clinical diagnoses of MCI and AD are typically made using clinical assessment and neuropsychological tests ( Jak et al., 2009 ; Petersen et al., 1999 ). Neuroimaging is increasingly being used to facilitate MCI and AD diagnosis and to monitor disease progression because it can highlight anatomical, physiological, metabolic, and functional changes of the underlying brain impairment in a longitudinal and non-invasive manner ( Johnson et al., 2012 ). About half of MCI patients will progress to AD, 15% to other forms of dementia, and 35% will not progress to dementia ( Campbell et al., 2013 ; Ganguli et al., 2019 ). While there is no cure for AD, there are experimental treatments to minimize symptoms or reduce β-amyloid in the brain. In addition, early identification of MCI patients who are at risk of developing AD or rapid disease progression could enable lifestyle changes, neurocognitive enrichment, and other interventions to improve or slow symptom progression, thereby improving quality of life ( Epperly et al., 2017 ). FDG-PET is a commonly used neuroimaging method to evaluate glucose metabolism. In neurodegenerative disease, neuronal dysfunction (as such accumulated oligomers and tau, deafferentation, and altered neurotransmission systems) as well as loss of brain cells (neurons, glia, astrocytes, etc.) could result in lower glucose metabolism compared to normal aging ( Hammond et al., 2020 ). FDG-PET imaging provides neural correlates of glucose metabolism to the underlying brain dysfunction ( Johnson et al., 2012 ), differential diagnosis of different forms of dementia, prognosis, and the monitoring of disease progression and intervention. FDG-PET findings have been correlated with clinical tests, neurocognitive tests, cerebrospinal fluid markers of AD, as well as other molecular PET tracers more specific to AD. FDG-PET has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity to clinical diagnosis of AD ( Lesman-Segev et al., 2021 ). MCI patients generally have moderately lower brain glucose metabolism compared to controls, and thus FDG-PET has the potential to be used to identify MCI patients at risk of progressing to AD. There is, however, significant heterogeneity in brain metabolism across populations and disease pathophysiology, resulting in overlaps across normal aging, MCI, and AD individuals ( Anchisi et al., 2005 ) and making the task of identifying MCI patients at risk of AD conversion challenging. Machine learning (ML) is increasingly being used in medicine given its ability to learn complex patterns embedded in multi-modal clinical data to inform outcomes ( de Bruijne, 2016 ; Erickson et al., 2017 ). In contrast to traditional ML methods which requires a prior feature extraction, deep learning (DL) methods, such as the convolutional neural network (CNN), have gained increasing popularity given their superior performance to automatically extract latent features from medical imaging data to achieve accurate classification of disease sub-phenotypes and prediction of clinical outcomes ( Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015 ). A few traditional ML and DL studies predicting MCI conversion to AD using MRI data have been reported ( Bron et al., 2021 ; Jo et al., 2019 ; Lin et al., 2018 ; Popuri et al., 2020 ; Shen et al., 2018 ; Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015 ) (also see review ( Grueso and Viejo-Sobera, 2021 )). Fewer traditional ML studies using FDG-PET to predict MCI conversion to AD ( Chetelat et al., 2020 ; Lin et al., 2020 ; Lu et al., 2018 ; Ma et al., 2021 ; Pagani et al., 2015 ; Popuri et al., 2018 ; Shen et al., 2019 ; Toussaint et al., 2012 ; Zhang et al., 2022 ). By contrast, DL predictions of MCI to AD conversion using whole-brain FDG-PET images are sparse ( De Santi et al., 2023 ; Ding et al., 2019 ; Etminani et al., 2022 ; Liu et al., 2018 ; Yee et al., 2020 ; Zhou et al., 2021 ). To our knowledge, there are no published DL studies to date to predict MCI to AD conversion using whole-brain PET scans with the inclusion of neurocognitive and demographic data. The goal of our study was to develop deep-learning feature-agnostic architectures to predict MCI to AD conversion within three years after the initial MCI diagnosis using whole-brain FDG-PET images and neurocognitive test scores at baseline diagnosis. FDG-PET whole-brain images were used without a priori regional brain segmentation. We evaluated the performance of FDG-PET images alone, and whether the addition of age and cognitive test scores could improve prediction accuracies. Transfer learning from classification model was applied. Several convolutional model architectures, and methods of merging data were evaluated to derive the final optimal deep-learning predictive model. METHODS Study Population Data were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database ( http://adni.loni.usc.edu ), which included ADNI1, ADNI2, or ADNIGO datasets. The inclusion criteria require the recruited participants to have a 3D whole-brain FDG-PET scan taken within two months of baseline diagnosis, with T1 preprocessing and without being converted to SUVR. The final cohort that met the criteria contained a total of 612 subjects, including 205 patients with the diagnosis of Dementia of Alzheimer’s type (DAT), 150 cognitively normal subjects, 164 stable-MCI subjects, and 93 unstable-MCI subjects. The patient cohort in this study did not have CSF or PET data on amyloid or tau. This work utilizes a three-dimensional convolutional neural network (3D-CNN) with whole-brain FDG-PET input to predict if a patient with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) will convert to dementia within three years of their baseline diagnosis. Those who do convert are labeled as unstable-MCI, while those who do not are labeled as stable-MCI. Neuroimage Preprocessing PET scans are first registered to a reference brain using FSL-FLIRT ( Jenkinson et al., 2012 ). To eliminate the effect of non-specific PET signals that bind to the non-brain region, we perform skull-striping on the MRI image that was registered to the same reference brain using the DeepBrain Python library ( Itzcovich, 2018 ). This results in a stripped PET image, due to the lack of a skull-stripping library trained on PET images. We then apply the MRI-derived brain mask onto the PET images to exclude any FDG signals that bind to the non-brain regions (e.g., skull, and skin tissues). When an image is fed to the training model, each scan is given a randomized data augmentation: flipping along the sagittal, random rotation of an amount from −12 to 12 degrees, or the image is kept the same. This was done to create constantly unique data and reduce overfitting during the training process. Deep Neural Network Architecture To accomplish this task, we first trained a classification 3D-CNN to differentiate between the brains of dementia patients and cognitively normal “healthy control” subjects. Afterward, we performed transfer learning to adapt the task to predicting dementia conversion. To evaluate the clinical relevance of the constructed model, saliency maps were also generated to visualize the local brain regions that were important for the model to determine the prediction outcome. Three models were built using the Keras library on Python for the purposes of this work: A) A PET-only 3D-CNN, B) a deep neural network with cognitive test score inputs, and C) a combination model utilizing both imaging and test score inputs. These will be denoted as the PET, CSI, and PET-CS models respectively. The set of images were randomly split into 70% train, 15% validation, and 15% test sets at the patient level to avoid data leakage during training, using the train_test_split function in SciPy ( Virtanen et al., 2020 ). The first model ( Figure 1A ) takes in a whole-brain skull-stripped PET scan as input, and it runs through a series of two blocks containing 3D convolution (Conv3D(3×3×3)), LeakyReLU, MaxPooling3D layer, BatchNormalization layer, and Dropout layers in sequence. Within each block, a dropout layer with a rate of .20 was used to avoid overfitting. Then, the convolutional outputs are inputted through four fully connected (Dense) layers. The convolutional layers contained 32 filters for input blocks and 64 filters in remaining ones. The first three Dense layers contain 10, 8, and 5 neurons respectively. The activation function used for the convolution and Dense layers is the leaky rectified linear unit (LeakyReLU), to limit the vanishing gradients problem. The final Dense layer uses a sigmoid activation for binary classification. For the model that uses cognitive test scores ( Figure 1B ), the inputs consist of an array containing five cognitive scores for patients, Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes (CDRSB), Logical Memory - Delayed Recall (LDEL), Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE), Modified Preclinical Alzheimer’s Cognitive Composite, digit and log trails (mPACCdigit and mPACCtrailsB) ( Nagaraj and Duong, 2021 ). The input arrays are sent through a series of four Dense layers of filter size 8, 16, 16, and 32, followed by a sigmoid activation. These cognitive test scores were selected for being the top five markers for diagnosing Alzheimer’s dementia. Lastly, we created the multi-level composited multi-modal model ( Figure 1C ) by adding a concatenation layer in the PET model right after the convolution blocks, to aggregate embedded features derived from the test score input and four Dense layers. The concatenated features were then sent through a fourth Dense layer similar to that in the PET model. Two additional models were also created from the PET and PET-CS architectures by including subject age in the concatenation step. During the initial training of the model, overfitting was observed in the beginning stages of training as expected. To alleviate this, the complexity of the model was limited by adding l2-regularizers to each convolution layer and the cognitive-score-based Dense layers to improve the model’s generalizability. We used a regularization parameter of 0.01 for each one. Model Training, Validation, Testing Labels were assigned to each subject (0 for NC and 1 for DAT during classification and 0 for stable, and 1 for unstable during prediction). A random seed was set constant across each training session so data splits would remain unchanged over different attempts of the experiment. During the training process, the test set was always set aside until a model had been selected from the validation step. Metrics used for evaluating the model are balanced accuracy, the average of the sensitivity and specificity, where 0.5 is the threshold between a positive and negative prediction and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) for providing a performance measure that is more applicable to a variety of thresholds. During the training of the AD/CN classification model, training was run for 300 epochs with early stopping using patience of 10 epochs of no loss function improvement. After the training stops, the epoch that yielded the highest validation accuracy was selected using a checkpoint and tested using the test set. The training was done using a learning rate of 0.001 and a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer with an exponential decay learning rate scheduler so convergence could occur. The best-performing model was saved and passed into the second stage for further fine-tuning for the task of predicting MCI-AD conversion prediction task. 5-fold cross-validation was used to create train and validation sets over five separate folds for the prediction training. The training was attempted with the Adam optimizer initially ( Kingma and Ba, 2014 ), but the accuracy fluctuated heavily with it during later stages of training, failing to converge and creating unstable models that did not transition well into the test set or transfer learning stages. Ultimately, SGD with a learning rate scheduler was used for the remainder of the models as it provided the best combination of loss decline, accuracy, and stability. Heatmaps We implement a Grad-CAM ( Duanmu et al., 2020 ; Selvaraju et al., 2017 ) technique that can be applied to 3-D convolutional layers in the PET model. The Grad-CAM algorithm is run on the first layer to output meaningful heatmaps. Through the algorithm, we were able to generate images that visually emphasized the regions of the brain that were weighed most heavily by the model through PET scans. Heat maps were overlaid on anatomical MRI, and Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical brain atlases were used to identify brain structures. We used fsleyes to overlay the PET image and the brain atlas to label the regions we obtained through our analyses. RESULTS Experimental data Table 1 summary of the demographic characteristics for AD, CN, sMCI, and pMCI. Subjects across groups showed similar age ranges. The sample sizes across four groups were reasonably distributed. The numbers of male and female in each group were also reasonably distributed albeit the AD, sMCI, and pMCI group has more male participants, while the CN group has a larger number of female participants. Model training and results Supplement Figure 1 shows the training and validation loss for PET + Age, and PET + Age + CS model during the initial training for the AD vs CN model, as well as the fine-tuning stage for the MCI conversion prediction model. During the initial model training, the loss value was high in the early epochs and quickly dropped in the initial two epochs and leveled off with increasing epochs. The training and testing loss for the same two models during the fine-tuning prediction averaged over the five-fold cross-validation, showed little to no loss change during fine-tuning requiring much fewer number of epochs to finish the training. These results indicate the effectiveness of the initial model training before the transfer learning, in which the model has already learned major image-based features relevant to the downstream task in the fine-tuning stage. Table 2 shows the classification performance of the model trained on CN vs. AD data before transfer learning. Classification performance metrics reached 100% accuracy and AUC for models containing cognitive scores, likely because some of CN scores were used to define AD. Table 3 shows the prediction performance from zero-shot predictions. Prediction using PET, PET + Age, CS, CS+AGE, PET + CS, and PET + CS + Age models yielded balanced accuracies of 0.5651, 0.5996, 0.7130, 0.7075, and 0.7326 respectively. The AUCs were 0.6102, 0.6029, 0.7496, 0.7983, and 0.7849. Prediction specificity was generally higher than sensitivity. Heatmaps Post-training saliency maps for prediction model were generated, showing regions that the model deemed to be important for the prediction tasks ( Figure 2 ). Heatmaps identified the putamen, thalamus, inferior frontal gyrus, parietal operculum, precuneus cortices, calcarine cortices, temporal gyrus, and planum temporale to be important for predicting MCI conversion to AD within 3 years. DISCUSSION This study employed deep learning models to predict which patient is likely to convert from MCI to AD within three years based on baseline FDG-PET whole-image and neurocognitive test scores. The major findings are: i) zero-shot learning outperformed fine-tuning ii) neurocognitive scores predict better than PET per se, iii) the best model is a combination of PET, age, neurocognitive data with an AUC of 0.7849±.0963 and a balanced accuracy of 0.7326±.0978, iii) the saliency maps showed the brain regions (putamen, thalamus, inferior frontal gyrus, parietal operculum, precuneus cortices, calcarine cortices, temporal gyrus, and planum temporale) that the CNN algorithm deems important for prediction. Deep-learning of FDG-PET data offers an innovative approach to identify neural correlates important for MCI to AD disease progression. It is not surprising that the neurocognitive data together predicted better than FDG-PET per se because some of the neurocognitive data were used in the diagnosis of AD. Neurocognitive data however did not provide neural correlates of the underlying pathophysiology. The addition of FDG-PET images to neurocognitive data markedly improved prediction performance. Imaging and neurocognitive data complement each other. Most ML studies using FDG-PET data to predict MCI to AD conversion to date employed extracted FDG SUV from different brain regions ( Lu et al., 2018 ; Ma et al., 2021 ; Pagani et al., 2015 ; Popuri et al., 2018 ; Shen et al., 2019 ; Toussaint et al., 2012 ). By contrast, predictions of MCI to AD conversion using whole-brain FDG-PET images are sparse ( Ding et al., 2019 ; Lin et al., 2020 ; Liu et al., 2018 ; Yee et al., 2020 ). There are no published studies to date using deep learning to predict MCI to AD conversion using whole-brain FDG-PET images with the inclusion of neurocognitive and demographic data. Our study is novel because we used 3D CNN DL with a feature-agnostic approach on whole-brain FDG-PET images (without extracting FDG-PET activity from regional brain volumes) and incorporated neurocognitive and demographic data for predicting MCI to AD conversion. Heatmaps identified the putamen, thalamus, inferior frontal gyrus, parietal operculum, precuneus cortices, calcarine cortices, temporal gyrus, and planum temporale to be important for predicting MCI conversion to AD within 3 years. The brain regions reported herein are in good alignment with the FDG-PET-informed saliency brain regions reported in previous studies using a different (guided backpropagation) visualization technique ( Liu et al., 2018 ; Yee et al., 2020 ), in which deep gray matter brain regions such as putamen and thalamus were also reported. Putamen and thalamus have been implicated in AD pathogenesis using different analysis methods ( Chaudhary et al., 2022 ; de Jong et al., 2008 ; Disorders, 2015 ). A primary function of the putamen is to regulate movements and influence various types of learning, among others. The thalamus has multiple functions, generally believed to act as a relay station, or hub, relaying information between different subcortical areas and the cerebral cortex ( Disorders, 2015 ). The precuneus is a brain region involved in a variety of complex functions, which include recollection and memory, integration of information relating to the perception of the environment, cue reactivity, mental imagery strategies, and episodic memory retrieval, among others ( Disorders, 2015 ). Calcarine cortices are involved in visual processing. The planum temporale, a highly lateralized brain structure, plays an important role in auditory processing responsible for representing the location of sound in space ( Deouell et al., 2007 ) and is involved in language and music processing. Areas of glucose hypometabolism in the precuneus, parietotemporal association cortices, and posterior cingulate cortex in MCI patients have been previously reported ( Marcus et al., 2014 ). As the disease progresses, the affected regions spread to involve the frontal cortices, whereas the metabolism in the striatum, thalamus, primary sensorimotor cortices, visual cortices, and cerebellum are relatively preserved ( Ishii, 2014 ; Mosconi, 2005 ; Silverman et al., 2001 ). Although our findings are in general agreement with literature, areas of glucose hypometabolism could vary be due to different disease variants, differences in patient cohorts, analysis methods, sample sizes, and prediction models used. Further studies are needed. It is also possible that the differences observed in the regions involved could potentially be attributed to distinct AD variants. Additionally, dissimilarities in the results may arise from the presence of various AD variants. Specifically, the typical variant may predominate in the precuneus and parietal cortex, the PCA variant in the calcarine cortex, the aphasic variant in the planum temporalis, and the AD variant in the frontal cortex ( Gaiteri et al., 2016 ; Naj et al., 2017 ). Our classification models of controls vs AD were remarkably accurate, similar or better than those previously reported in the literature (see reviews ( Xu et al., 2023 ; Zhao et al., 2023 )). Our prediction performance metrics were moderate to good, suggesting that it is challenging to predict conversion 3 years into the future. There were unlikely issues in the prediction models per se. Some studies have previously reported similar or better performance using different analysis methods ( Chaudhary et al., 2022 ; de Jong et al., 2008 ; Disorders, 2015 ; Liu et al., 2018 ; Yee et al., 2020 ). However, interpretation of performance metrics needs to be made with caution. Differences in performance could be due to differences many factors. One significant factor to take into account is the duration over which the models make predictions. Varying prediction durations might impact the evaluation of model performance and comparing metrics from models with different prediction time frames requires cautious interpretation. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the data used in the study can introduce confounding variables that affect the performance metrics. Diverse data sources or data with varying characteristics might lead to inconsistent outcomes across different models, which must be carefully weighed during interpretation. Another crucial consideration is the possibility of study reporting bias. Researchers may unintentionally emphasize positive results or downplay negative outcomes, leading to an inaccurate representation of the true performance of the models. This bias needs to be acknowledged and accounted for when drawing conclusions. Moreover, the sample size used to evaluate model performance is an essential aspect to consider. Small sample sizes can result in less reliable and less generalizable findings. It is crucial to recognize the potential impact of sample size on performance metrics and to interpret the results accordingly. Overfitting is another potential challenge that needs attention. Models that are overfitted to the training data may perform exceptionally well on that specific dataset but fail to generalize to new and unseen data. This situation can lead to inflated performance metrics and should be carefully identified and addressed. In contrast to DL of PET-FDG studies, there are more reports of DL applications using MRI to predict MCI conversion to AD ( Bron et al., 2021 ; Jo et al., 2019 ; Lin et al., 2018 ; Shen et al., 2018 ) (also see review ( Grueso and Viejo-Sobera, 2021 )). A study using 3D CNN deep learning of whole-brain MRI images without extracting regional brain volumes found the lateral ventricles, periventricular deep white matter as well as extensive cortical gray matter ( Ocasio and Duong, 2021 ). Ventricular enlargement and atrophy are known to be associated with AD. Reduction in white-matter volume has been described in AD. Atrophy has also been reported in the cingulate gyrus ( Brun and Gustafson, 1976 ; Hirono et al., 1998 ; Jones et al., 2006 ), the middle occipital gyrus ( Zhang and Wang, 2015 ), and the putamen ( Pini et al., 2016 ) using MRI. While there are significant overlaps of brain structures of deep learning using MRI and FDG-PET data, these structures do not overlap completely because anatomical MRI measures brain volume and is thereby sensitive to brain atrophy, whereas FDG-PET measure glucose metabolism and is thereby sensitive to reduced metabolic activities. Future DL studies could combine MRI and FDG-PET images to improve the prediction of AD conversions. Other types of MRI data (such as rsfMRI and DTI) could also be included in the DL prediction models. The simple sequential model was better at capturing classification patterns in PET imaging than more complex neural network architectures. Alternate architectures were tested by concatenating the separately pre-trained PET and CS unimodal models so that the model would not overfit toward the cognitive scores. However, this resulted in lowered accuracies after fine-tuning. Other post-concatenation architectures were tested, but the one outlined above yielded the strongest performing. Our models are trained on whether conversion occurs within 3 years, homogenous data. Differences in performance could be due to differences in many factors. One significant factor to take into account is the duration over which the models make predictions. Varying prediction durations might impact the evaluation of model performance and comparing metrics from models with different prediction time frames requires cautious interpretation ( Qiu et al., 2022 ). Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the data used in the study can introduce confounding variables that affect the performance metrics. Diverse sources or data with varying characteristics such as the PET scanner difference might lead to inconsistent outcomes across different models, which must be carefully weighed during interpretation. Another crucial consideration is the possibility of study reporting bias. Researchers may unintentionally emphasize positive results or downplay negative outcomes, leading to an inaccurate representation of the true performance of the models. This bias needs to be acknowledged and accounted for when drawing conclusions. Moreover, the sample size used to evaluate model performance is also important to consider. Small sample sizes can result in less reliable and less generalizable findings ( Gupta et al., 2023 ; Holzinger et al., 2019 ; Miotto et al., 2018 ). Overfitting is another potential challenge. Models that are overfitted to the training data may perform exceptionally well on that specific dataset but fail to generalize to new and unseen data ( Gupta et al., 2023 ; Holzinger et al., 2019 ; Miotto et al., 2018 ), potentially resulting in inflated performance metrics. Strengths and limitations The strength and novelty of the current study lie in three folds: 1) we proposed a two-step feature agnostic transfer-learning framework to achieve effective extraction of features related to AD conversion from whole-brain FDG-PET images (without a priori segmentation to extract FDG-PET activity from regional brain volumes), and evaluated the efficiency of two transfer-learning approaches - zero-shot learning and fine-tuning; 3) we performed detailed investigations of the anatomical correspondence for the model-derived saliency maps using Grad-CAM approach to evaluate the clinical and anatomical validity of the prediction model beyond prediction accuracy; 4) we derived a multi-modal feature embedding framework that incorporated the FDG-PET-based neuroimaging features with the cognitive score and demographic information, and performed rigorous evaluation and comparison among single-modality models and multi-modality models.” Our study has several limitations. The current FDG PET dataset had a small sample size and did not contain longitudinal data. Despite the small sample sizes and complexity of the data, our deep-learning algorithm correctly identified most salient brain regions previously implicated in AD disease and MCI to AD progression using established methods. However, our model needs to be tested on larger datasets to achieve generalizability. Follow-up study would include analyses comparing other predictive models. Furthermore, future studies could also include other PET tracers (i.e., AV-45) and genetic data (i.e., APOE-4), and cerebrospinal fluid markers but sample sizes of these data are likely small. Similarly, multiparametric MRI (such as anatomical, diffusion-tensor imaging, task functional MRI, and resting-state MRI) will be incorporated into ML models in the future. We also did not account for race and ethnicity because the ADNI cohort is mostly Caucasians and the sample was already small. Sex differences in the risk of developing AD has been reported. We did not investigate the sex variable because of small sample sizes to avoid overfitting. Finally, in the current study, the definition for CN, MCI, and AD are derived from the consensus clinical diagnosis reported in the ADNI cohort. Currently, there is a limited number of subjects in ADNI with FDG-PET who also have data of amyloid or tau PET or CSF, which limits the sample size as well as the determination of the cutoff for positivity reads. With the increasing number of subjects who have multi-modal data available in ADNI. Future studies could also investigate the use of FDG-PET to predict the biologically defined AD, which was defined by the NIA-AA research framework based on the positivity of tau and amyloid biomarkers, derived either from PET or CSF.” CONCLUSIONS This study employed deep-learning convolutional neural network models on whole-brain FDG-PET images, and neurocognitive measures at initial diagnosis to predict MCI to AD conversion three years later. Deep learning provides neural correlates of brain regions associated with AD conversion and accurately predicts which patients are likely to convert from MCI to AD, offering the potential to assist doctors in providing more accurate prognoses and planning interventions. Supplementary Material