Background As the brain ages, it undergoes a loss of synaptic structures and neurons, leading to brain atrophy and cognitive impairment in older adults [ 1 ]. Concurrently, age-related risk factors and diseases, such as neurodegenerative disorders, can inflict abnormal damage on the brain, contributing to atypical aging patterns [ 2 ]. For instance, in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the presence of amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau pathology could accelerate brain aging and result in accelerated brain atrophy and cognitive impairment in the elder [ 3 - 5 ]. Understanding the normal aging process of the brain and identifying indicators of premature aging can assist in evaluating brain health and potentially facilitate the early diagnosis of AD. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive and efficient diagnostic tool that provides detailed functional and structural information about the brain by utilizing an alternating magnetic field to the subject. Structural MRI generates high-resolution images of brain anatomy, allowing researchers to examine structural changes in the brain, such as cortical atrophy. Presently, the MRI offers numerous advantages for diagnosis, including widespread accessibility and the absence of the need for radioactive tracers, which are required in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging [ 6 , 7 ]. Consequently, MRI is employed to assess the structural changes of brain and evaluate disease severity [ 8 ]. Generally, MRI preprocessing involves numerous sophisticated steps, including field correction, nonlinear registration and segmentation. The brain segmentation relies on specific atlases to calculate regional information, such as cortical thickness and gray matter volume, which may limit our understanding of the changes of the whole brain. To comprehensively understand the changes of brain structure, and sensitively differentiate between the normal aging and early stage of AD, further advancements in MRI analysis algorithms are needed. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) is one of the most widely utilized deep learning algorithms in the field of computer vision [ 9 ]. Unlike traditional MRI analysis methods that usually need atlases for segmentation, CNN can automatically extract abstract graphical features such as shape, contour, intensity, and other attributes, by training the parameters of convolutional kernels. The detection of complex spatial patterns that are particularly valuable in medical imaging analysis, such as identifying subtle pathological changes in brain structures. Recent studies have highlighted the advantage of deep learning techniques in processing MRI data for brain aging prediction. The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) is a widely used metric for evaluating brain age prediction models, which quantifies the mean absolute difference between predicted and chronological ages. Bashyam et al. trained a 2D inception-resnet-v2 model (pre-trained on ImageNet) by 2D MRI slices, and achieved the MAE of 3.702 in predicting brain age on the test dataset [ 10 ]. Lee et al. developed a brain age prediction model based on the 3D-DenseNet to analysis sMRI imaging. and achieved prediction result with MAE of 3.487 [ 11 ]. Besides for brain age prediction, MRI based 3D CNN models can also be used for other prediction task. Lew et al. utilized a 3D CNN models to predict amyloid PET positivity, and achieved an AUC of 0.79 when combining MRI with other clinical data [ 12 ]. It is generally believed that 3D CNN based models performed better than 2D models in MRI-based prediction tasks. However, 3D CNN models require a huge number of parameters and are usually more difficult to train compared with 2D CNN models. In this study, we developed multi-modality models to analyze structural MRI to predict brain age, cognition function and amyloid pathologies. More than 10,000 T1-weighted MRI scans from over 7,000 individuals across 6 cohorts were collected for model training and validation. MRI is segmented into patches and then be process by 3D CNN layers to extract the structural information. Combined with other clinical information, all these data is integrated by a transformer module for prediction. The model consists of Three basic modules: input module, transformer module and output module. The input module processes different types of data, including 3D imaging data, continuous variables such as age, and categorical data such as sex or APOE genotype. The transformer module leverages self-attention layers to learn the interrelationships among different modalities data and integrate all data to a unique feature vector. The output module transforms can be used for specific prediction tasks. Utilizing the constructed framework, we developed a brain age prediction model. Based on this model, we also adapted our predictive model to evaluate cognitive function and amyloid pathology by transfer learning. Methods Participants We collected more than 10,000 T1-weighted MRI scans of 7,000 patients across 6 cohorts for model training and evaluation, including Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS), Australian Imaging, Biomarker & Lifestyle Flagship Study of Aging (AIBL), Information eXtraction from Images (IXI), China Aging and Neurodegenerative Initiative (CANDI) and Hefei Aging Study (HAS) [ 13 – 15 ]. All participants contain baseline MRI scans and parts of them have visit MRI scans. Samples containing missing data, such as age, sex, and APOE genotype, are still used for model training because our model can ignore the missing data through attention mechanisms. MRI preprocess Deep learning algorithms can automatically extract complex and abstract features from raw images [ 16 ]. We endeavor to simplify the processing steps to retain original image information. The entire processing pipeline consists of two main steps: skull stripping and linear registration. The raw T1-weighted MRI images contain the skull, neck and face, which not only fail to contribute additional information for diagnosis but may hinder the training and evaluation. Hence, skull stripping is performed on the raw images to eliminate all non-brain components. Nonlinear registration can ensure that all images share the same spatial positioning and orientation. It's important to note that twisting operations can also result in the loss of relative location information. Linear registration was applied where the degree of freedom is limited to 6, so that we can treat the brain as a rigid body to preserve the relative spatial information. After linear registration, we obtained an image with dimensions of 192 × 192x192 where each voxel represents a spatial signal intensity of 1 mmx1 mmx1 mm. Finally, we rescaled image intensity range between 0 to 1 to reduce signal differences obtained from different machines. These processed images were used for model training and evaluation. Data augmentation During model training process, we use 3D data augmentation to enhance the generalization of the model. The specific operations are as follows: (1) We randomly rotated the original image around the x, y, and z axes within a range of −30 to 30 degrees. (2) We randomly translated the image in the x, y, and z directions by −20 to 20 pixels. (3) We added a random Gaussian noise with a mean of 0 and a variance ranging from 0 to 0.1 to the original image. Data augmentation is only used during the model training stage, and during the evaluation phase, the original images are used directly for assessing the model's performance. Model architecture We proposed a hybrid multi-modal deep learning framework that integrates various types of data through a transformer module. This framework is capable of processing 3D MRI data alongside other demographic data, such as age, sex and APOE genotype. By incorporating different output predictors, our model can be employed to predict brain age, cognitive function and amyloid plaque. The overall framework comprises three primary modules: input modules, transformer modules, and output modules. The input modules are designed to handle various types of data and generate the corresponding feature vectors. The raw T1-weighted MRI images were transformed into 3D images of size 192 × 192x192, which are subsequently segmented into patches measuring 6 × 6x6, each with dimensions of 32 × 32x32 [ 17 ]. Given the substantial computational requirements and parameter burden associated with linear projections for each patch, we implemented a 3D CNN with residual connection to extract the corresponding feature vector [ 18 ]. For other demographic variables, we utilized a fully connected neural networks (FCN) to generate related feature vectors for prediction. The transformer module consists of six identical layers, each containing a multi-head self-attention mechanism and a position-wise fully connected feed-forward layer. Some participants may have missing data. The transformer module is adept automatically ignoring any missing data and utilizing the available information for predictions, thereby more samples for training can enhance the generalization of the model [ 19 ]. In terms of the output module, it can be configured with any neural network architecture and can serve either as a generative or discriminative model. In this study, we primarily focused on discriminative analysis, which will entail utilizing a three-layer FCN for fitting and classification tasks. Brain age prediction model As deep learning framework was constructed. Our brain age prediction model used 3D CNN and FCN to process MRI images and sex data from healthy aging participants to predict brain age. During model training, we set the batch size to 48. Due to small batch size, we chose instance normalization instead of batch normalization in input modules [ 20 , 21 ]. The mean squared error (MSE) function serves as the loss function during training process. The AdamW optimizer is utilized to update all parameters, with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a weight decay of 0.001 [ 22 ]. During training, if the MSE in the training set does not decrease for 5 consecutive epochs, we reduce the learning rate to 10% of its current value. If the loss function remains unchanged for 10 consecutive epochs, training is halted. Following this, the model is evaluated on the ADNI (test) and CANDI datasets. Transfer learning models for cognition function and amyloid plaque prediction Building upon brain age prediction model, we developed a cognition prediction model that accurately predicts the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score and performs binary classifications among cognitively normal (CN, CDR = 0), mild cognitive impairment (MCI, CDR = 0·5), and dementia (CDR > 0·5) patients. We replaced the output module with new components: a CDR regression prediction module and three cognitive binary classification modules (CN vs. MCI, CN vs. dementia and MCI vs. dementia). Additionally, extra FCN layers were added in input to process the sample’ s chronological age. In the model training stage, we chose the MSE loss function for CDR regression and the cross-entropy loss function for cognitive classification. Furthermore, since several newly added parameters are initialized randomly, we adopt a phased training approach: during the initial epoch, we fix the parameters that were previously trained and only updated the new parameters. From the second epoch onward, all parameters were updated simultaneously. The training terminates only when the MSE loss for CDR fails to decrease over ten consecutive epochs. Finally, we built an amyloid plaque prediction model based on our cognition prediction model. We integrated the APOE genotype as a new input and redefined the output module for regressing the standard uptake value ratio (SUVR) values of 18 F-AV-45 (florbetapir) positron emission tomography (PET). During the model training process, we used MSE as the loss function. The training process terminated only when the loss failed to show any improvement for ten consecutive epochs. Feature map calculation The GradCAM algorithms can be used to assess the contribution of different content within an image to its classification. By leveraging this algorithm, we can explore the brain regions that highly correlated with dementia. In this process, we computed the feature map for each dementia individual in the training datasets. Then, we non-linearly registered these feature maps to the MNI standard space, utilizing the original T1-weighted images as a reference Finally, we merge all the dementia patient's feature maps into a single image. By setting a suitable threshold, we can locate brain regions that are highly relevant to dementia discrimination. Computational hardware and software The model training and evaluation process is executed on a Linux server equipped with 2 CPU, 128GB of physical memory, and an RTX 4090 GPU with 24GB of memory. We use FMRIB Software Library (FSL) (v6.0.5.2) for MRI preprocess. Deep learning models were built based on python (v3.9) and pytorch(v1.13.0). We also use other python libraries to assist in model building, including torchio (v0.18.90), torchvision (v0.14.0), matplotlib (v3.5.3) and pandas (v1.4.3). Results Model building All MRI scans were converted into 3D images with same size by simple preprocess steps (Fig. 1 A). Six cohorts were used for model train and valuation. The patients from ADNI were divided into two parts: 90% are assigned to ADNI (train), and the remaining 10% are assigned to ADNI(test) (Table 1 ). Notably, follow-up data from the same patient only appear in same datasets and only one scan was selected in test datasets. Train set contains all individuals in ADNI (train), OASIS, AIBL, IXI and HAS. ADNI (test) and CANDI datasets are used as two validation datasets. Based on our deep learning framework (Fig. 1 B), we developed a brain age prediction model that contains 3D CNN layers (Fig. 1 C and Table S1) and FCN layers to process T1-weighted MRI images and sex data. Following this, we applied transfer learning to sequentially construct models for predicting cognitive function. We added FCN to process age data and replace brain age prediction module with CDR regression module and classification models in output modules. Finally, we built an amyloid prediction model by adding the APOE genotype processing module to input modules and replacing all output modules with an amyloid plaque prediction module (Fig. 1 D). Fig. 1 Multi-modality model architecture. A The original MRI data is skull-stripped and registered to the MNI standard space. To enhance model training and prevent over-fitting, we employ data augmentation techniques to generate additional training data. For model evaluation, we utilize the original preprocessed data. B The figure illustrates the primary architecture of our deep learning model. By constructing corresponding input modules, the data is transformed into vectors of size 256 × 1 or matrices of 256 × n. The transformer model is capable of concatenating all vectors and matrices as input. The output module processes the output vector from the transformer module to produce the final results. C This represents the main architecture of the MRI input modules. Each box corresponds to a convolution layer:"Cov"indicates a convolution layer, while"Res Conv"denotes a convolution layer with shortcut connections. The notation"k"refers to kernel size,"s"to stride,"p"to padding, and"c"to channels. D We utilize transfer learning to develop distinct models for different prediction tasks. On the left, we input MRI and age data to predict brain age, with all parameters randomly initialized. In the middle, we use MRI, sex, and chronological age as inputs to predict cognitive function. On the right, we input MRI, sex, age, and APOE genotype to predict the presence of amyloid deposition. Parameters in modules with yellow background were randomly generated, while parameters in modules with green background were transferred from the last model Table 1 participants in different cohorts subjects Scans (baseline + visit) Cognition (CN/MCI/dementia) Age (mean ± std) Sex (M/F) MMSE (mean ± std) APOE (ε4/no ε4/unknown) experiment OASIS 2512 2512 + 1539 1410/264/49 69.67 ± 13.10 1134/1378 28.25 ± 2.70 510/2002/1539 train AIBL 686 686 + 577 441/42/10 73.65 ± 6.77 302/383 27.48 ± 3.77 231/455/577 train HAS 594 594 + 0 594/0/0 60.89 ± 6.60 195/399 - - train IXI 466 466 + 0 465/0/0 49.06 ± 16.14 192/262 - - train ADNI (train) 2304 2304 + 6784 811/212/7 75.22 ± 7.47 1182/1121 26.41 ± 3.94 807/1497/6784 train ADNI (test) 241 241 + 1073 97/16/0 75.44 ± 7.31 137/104 27.69 ± 3.38 87/154/1073 test1 CANDI 536 536 + 295 114/188/64 62.67 ± 8.89 214/322 18.46 ± 7.85 196/340/295 test2 Brain age prediction All samples for training were collected from cognitive unimpaired individuals, covering a diverse age spectrum ranging from 10 to 90 years. The model successfully converged after 152 epochs.(Table S3 and Fig S1) For CN in the ADNI (test) datasets, the RMSE was approximately 4.149 years and the MAE was around 3.302 years. As for the CANDI datasets, the RMSE was approximately 8.486 years and the MAE was 7.065 years for CN individuals (Fig. 2 A-H). Fig. 2 Brain age prediction results in the ADNI and CANDI test sets. A - D Scatter plots illustrated brain age for the CN (a), MCI (b), and dementia (c) groups, as well as for the entire sample (d) in the ADNI (test) datasets. Similarly. E – H , Scatter plots showing brain age for the CN (e), MCI (f), and dementia (g) groups, along with the overall sample (h) in the CANDI datasets. I Violin plots show brain age gap distribution in ADNI (test) datasets. J - l Scatter plots in CN, MCI and dementia subjects in ADNI (test) datasets. M Violin plots show brain age gap distribution in ADNI (test) datasets after correction. N - P Scatter plots in CN, MCI and dementia subjects in CANDI datasets after correction. Q - T Figures show corresponding images after corrected in ADNI (test) datasets. U - X Figures show corresponding images after corrected in CANDI datasets.”r” means Pearson correlation coefficient,”NS” means no significant To investigate variations in predicted brain age across different cognitive states, we stratified the datasets according to the CDR scale, categorizing all subjects in the ADNI (test) and CANDI datasets into three groups: CN, MCI and dementia. Subsequently, we compared the discrepancies between predicted brain age and chronological age within each cognitive category. In both the test datasets, the CN groups exhibited a narrower gap between predicted brain age and chronological age compared to the MCI and dementia groups. As cognitive function declines, the sample points shift towards the top-left corner of the coordinate axis, indicating that the predicted brain age exceeds the chronological age, which means premature aging. Next, we introduced a new metric: the brain age gap, which represents the difference between predicted brain age and chronological age. As cognitive function declines, the average brain age gap increases significantly in both ADNI (test) and CANDI datasets. However, there is negative correlation between the brain age gap and the chronological age in both datasets. To address this issue, We choose CN samples in each datasets to fit a linear model to adjust the brain age gaps across all cognitive subgroups in corresponding datasets. In the ADNI (test) datasets, brain age gap in all three subgroups showed no correlation with chronological ages. As for the CANDI datasets, the brain age gap in the CN and MCI group did not correlate with chronological age, whereas the dementia group demonstrated a correlation (Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.5, p < 0.001), albeit weaker than prior to correction (Fig. 2 I- X). After adjusting brain age gap in two datasets, the mean brain age gap for the CN group was 0 years (standard deviation: 3.559 years), while the mean for the MCI group was 1.439 years (standard deviation: 4.044 years) and for the dementia group was 4.230 years (standard deviation: 3.664 years). In the CANDI datasets, the mean brain age gap for CN group was 0 years (standard deviation: 5.952 years), the MCI group’s mean was 4.138 years (standard deviation: 5.187 years), and the dementia group’s mean was 8.650 years (standard deviation: 5.288 years). The t-tests were conducted to compare brain age gaps among different cognitive groups revealed significant differences in both datasets (Table S2). These differences became even more pronounced after adjusting for age. Furthermore, the predicted deviations in brain age demonstrated a significant upward trend accompanying cognitive decline, suggesting that the prediction model may serve as sensitive indicators of cognitive changes. Transfer learning for cognition prediction As suggested above, the abnormal brain aging was associated with cognitive impairment. Then, we applied transfer learning to build a cognitive prediction model to explore the relationship between brain structure and cognition function. Our model converged after 155 epochs.(Table S3 and Fig S1 A) In the ADNI (test) datasets, the RMSE is 0.334, whereas in the CANDI test set, the RMSE is 0.541 (Fig. 3 A-H). Fig. 3 Cognitive function prediction was evaluated in the ADNI (test) and the CANDI datasets. A - D The CDR prediction in the ADNI (test) datasets, which includes a violin plot of the distribution (a) and the binary classification results, including CN vs. MCI (b), MCI vs. dementia (c) and CN vs. dementia (d). E – H Feature scatter plots illustrating the CDR prediction results in the CANDI set, including a distribution violin plot (e) and binary classification including CN vs. MCI (f), MCI vs. dementia (g) and CN vs. dementia (h). I A fused feature map created by aligning the feature maps of all dementia samples from the training set to the MNI standard brain using the Grad-CAM algorithm. This map emphasizes the brain regions critical for cognitive function prediction, with purple-red areas indicating these significant regions We also applied binary classification task among CN, MCI and dementia groups, In the ADNI (test) datasets, the classification performance in normal vs. dementia group is optimal, with an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of approximately 0.949. For the classification task in CN vs. MCI group, the AUC is approximately 0.725. For the classification between MCI and dementia, the AUC is 0.869. As for CANDI datasets, the AUC is 0.941, 0.726 and 0.762 in CN vs. dementia, CN vs. MCI and MCI vs. dementia groups, respectively (Table S2). Visualization of cognitive impairment associated vulnerable brain regions The GradCAM algorithm was used to indicate which parts of the image have significant influence on the model's predictions decision [ 23 ]. We calculated and merged feature maps of dementia individuals into MNI space. Then regions highly correlated with cognitive impairment were identified (Fig. 3 I). The areas highlighting in purple-red indicate brain regions significantly contribute to the differentiation. Besides, deeper red shades representing a stronger influence on cognitive impairment identification. The spatial localization of brain regions that influence discrimination mainly focuses on two areas: parts of the cerebral cortex and the periventricular region. The purple-red regions encompass nearly the entirety of the cerebral cortex, which supports the association between cognitive decline and cortical atrophy [ 24 ]. Across the entire cerebral cortex, the medial temporal lobe region demonstrates greater significance compared to other regions. This also corresponds with the observation that this region is the first to undergo atrophy during the progression of tau pathology in the AD patients [ 25 ]. Besides, The corpus callosum and the cingulate gyrus in center region in brain are also significantly important [ 26 , 27 ]. As for the periventricular region, the hippocampus and the amygdala is more important which is already proven to be associated with dementia [ 28 , 29 ]. Interestingly, the nucleus accumbens are covered with red, indicating greater significance in cognitive function judgment [ 30 ]. Brain age gap is correlated AD related biomarkers To investigate the pathological factors contributing to abnormal brain aging, the multiple linear regression models was conducted to exam the correlation between brain age gap and both CSF and blood AD pathological biomarkers, as well as AD imaging biomarkers in CANDI dataset, with adjustments for age, sex, and APOE genotype. We found that in the blood, levels of Aβ42 and the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio exhibited a negative correlation with brain age gap while levels of Aβ40 show no correlation(Fig. 4 A-C). Besides, phosphorylated Tau 181 (pTau) and total Tau (tTau) in the plasma showed positive correlation with brain age gap (Fig. 4 D-F). Furthermore, plasma levels of neurofilament light chain (NFL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) also demonstrated a significant positive correlation with brain age (Fig. 4 G-H). Similarly, in the CSF, Aβ42, Aβ40, and the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio all showed significant negative correlations with brain age gap (Fig. 4 I-K). In contrast, phosphorylated Tau 181 (pTau) and total Tau (tTau) in the CSF were positively correlated with brain age gap (Fig. 4 L-M). Regarding imaging data, brain age gap was significantly positively correlated with PET SUVR value, and it was positively correlated with white matter hyperintensity (WMH) volume, which is indicative of small vessel damage in the brain (Fig. 4 O-P). Fig. 4 Correlation between brain age gap and AD related biomarkers. A-H Scatter plots show correlation between blood biomarkers and brain age gap. I - N Scatter plots show correlation between CSF biomarkers and brain age gap. O - P , Scatter plots show correlation between imaging biomarker and brain age gap. Multiple linear regression was used to evaluate the correlation between brain age gap and biomarker. Sex, age and APOE genotype were adjusted. We use the t-test to examined whether each parameter (β) is correlated with brain age gap after FDR correlation. FDR method was used for multiple comparison correction Transfer learning for amyloid plaque prediction Finally, based on our cognition prediction model, we further modified the model to predict AV45 PET SUVR value, which can represent amyloid plaque positivity (Fig. 5 ). The RMSE in the ADNI (test) datasets is 0.175, and similarly, the RMSE in the CANDI datasets is also 0.175. Fig. 5 The Amyloid pathology prediction in the ADNI (test) and CANDI datasets. A Scatter plot shown predicted SUVR value in ADNI (test) set. B ROC curve shown the performance of amyloid plaque prediction in ADNI (test) set. C Scatter plot show predicted SUVR value in CANDI set. D ROC curve shown the performance of amyloid plaque prediction in CANDI set Using 1.11 as the cutoff value, the predicted SUVR values from the model are categorized into positive and negative classes [ 31 ]. The accuracy, area under the ROC curve (AUC) and other relevant information are calculated (Table S4). In the ADNI (test) datasets, the area under the ROC curve is 0.742, with an accuracy of 0.654. In the CANDI test set, the area under the ROC curve is 0.796, and the accuracy is 0.755. The correlation between the predicted SUVR and the actual SUVR in these two datasets is around 0.4 to 0.5. To further investigate the prediction level of amyloid plaques in different cognitive groups, the test set was divided into three groups based on cognition. For the ADNI (test) datasets, the areas under the ROC curves for the CN group, MCI group, and dementia group are 0.704, 0.687, and 0.905, respectively. For the CANDI datasets, the areas under the ROC curves for the MCI group and the dementia group are 0.751 and 0.803, respectively. Discussion In this study, we developed a deep learning algorithm incorporating both the 3D CNN and transformer models to predict brain age, cognitive status, and amyloid pathology. The framework of the algorithm consists of three distinct modules. The input module is designed to process various types of data into vectors or matrices. For T1-weighted MRI data, we utilized the 3D CNN model for feature extraction, segmenting the MRI data into 256 patches and extracting features from each one. For handling multiple types of data, we employed the transformer model, which leverages its attention mechanism to capture relationships among different patches and demographic information. Besides, the self-attention layer can effectively mask missing data by inputting an extra mask vector to each input module. This mechanism allows the model to process samples containing missing information and generate stable prediction results. The output module is used to generate predictions based on the feature vector generated by transformer module. In constructing our models, we utilized data from multiple databases across Asia, America, and Europe, with participants ranged in age from 10 to 90 years. The training datasets comprised more than 10,000 MRI imaging follow-up records. Most of these datasets included essential demographic information such as age, sex, APOE genotypes, and CDR scores. The extensive sample size helps enhance the generalization of our models, while the inclusion of demographic data enhances the accuracy of model predictions. To explore the change of brain structure during aging, we used T1-weighted MRI images and sex as inputs and constructed a brain age prediction model using data from cognitively normal individuals. In the ADNI (test) set, the RMSE was approximately 4.149 years, and the MAE was approximately 3.302 years. Compared to other studies on brain age prediction, our model manifested more better performance [ 32 , 33 ]. In the CANDI datasets, the RMSE was approximately 8.486 years, and the MAE was 7.065 years. The relatively poor prediction performance in CANDI may be attributed to random factors such as ethnicity, scanning machine, and scanning parameters. Meanwhile, we computed the brain age gap by subtracting the chronological age from the predicted brain age and adjusted the brain age gap using a linear model from the cognitively normal population in the test set. Using this model, we predicted data under different cognitive classifications in the test set and found that as cognitive decline progressed, the brain age gap showed a significant increase, indicating that the model the model has capability to predict abnormal brain aging. Due to the apparent differences in brain age gap among different cognitive groups, we are motivated to further investigate whether brain structure can directly predict cognitive status. Based on transfer learning, we constructed the brain cognition prediction model on the basis of the brain age prediction model. We observed that the prediction performance between cognitively normal individuals and dementia patients was optimal, achieving an AUC of approximately 0.95. Subsequently, in order to explore brain regions related to cognitive impairment, we used the GradCAM algorithm to generate feature map that affected the classification of dementia patients in the training set. Our finding revealed that the primary brain regions impacting cognition were the cerebral cortex, along with the corpus callosum and hippocampus, aligning with previously identified regions associated with cognitive function [ 34 ]. These results also suggested the credibility of the cognitive related regions selected by the prediction model. Next, we investigated the relationship between AD-related biomarkers and brain age gap in the CANDI datasets. The brain age gap is significantly correlated with Aβ42, Aβ40, the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, pTau, and tTau in the CSF, as well as Aβ42, the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, pTau, and tTau, NFL and GFAP in the blood. Consistently, we observed that AV45 PET SUVR value was positively correlated with brain age gap. Interestingly, we also observed that higher WMH volume that indicates more white matter damage and is positively correlated with brain age gap [ 35 ]. Thus, the brain age gap was closely associated with AD pathologies and cerebrovascular pathology, which has been suggested promoted abnormal brain aging and atrophy [ 36 ]. Given the relationship between brain age gap and AD pathologies, we also examine the prediction of amyloid pathologies by transfer learning from the brain cognition prediction model. By adding the APOE genotype, we observed the prediction achieved areas under the ROC curve of 0.742 and 0.796 in the ADNI (test) and CANDI datasets, respectively. Furthermore, we found that as cognitive function decline, the AUC and accuracy of prediction significantly increased. In the dementia patients, the amyloid plaque prediction model can serve as an auxiliary tool for predicting amyloid plaque deposition in the brain, thus assisting in the diagnosis of AD. Although the prediction accuracy of the model in the MCI group is lower compared to that in the dementia group, it may also serve as an early diagnosis tool to help screen the amyloid positivity among CN and MCI individuals. Conclusions Currently, our focus is exclusively on objective data for model training and evaluation, using MRI images along with age, sex, and APOE genotype, while excluding subjective measures such as MMSE scores. Our model demonstrates strong predictive performance, indicating that MRI-based predictive models can effectively assess brain aging, cognitive function, and amyloid pathology. The proposed MRI analysis algorithm, which employs deep learning techniques, offers several significant advantages. First, our deep learning models are trained on large datasets with well-labeled examples, allowing for the automatic identification of abnormal brain regions without the need for external prior knowledge such as brain atlases. Second, we incorporated a transformer module to integrate MRI features with demographic data, enabling the model to learn the interrelationships between different data types and to handle samples with missing information. Additionally, transfer learning serves as a powerful method for predicting cognitive function and amyloid plaque accumulation. Thus, our research also suggests that the brain age prediction model can serve as a general framework for identifying abnormal aging in the brain, applicable to other brain-related prediction tasks using various demographic information. Together, these studies provide further evidence that combining MRI with artificial intelligence can enhance our understanding of structural brain changes, offering an sensitively and non-invasive approach for the diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases. Supplementary Information