Introduction The advent of biomarker testing has led to marked advances in the ability of researchers and clinicians to predict, diagnose, and detect therapeutic targets for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) ( 1 , 2 ). While AD biomarker testing has been conducted primarily in research settings, there is growing evidence of the clinical utility of imaging-based markers of AD pathology and the field has recently witnessed the approval of the first two anti-amyloid medications, aducanumab (Aduhelm)( 3 – 5 ), and lecanemab (Leqembi)( 6 , 7 ) by the Food and Drug Administration. With these developments comes a growing need to identify and disseminate best practices to disclose biomarker results to persons meeting appropriate use criteria for such testing ( 8 ), including those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Optimizing the procedures for conducting effective disclosure sessions has the potential to yield AD biomarker disclosure communication that promotes comprehension while minimizing emotional upset on the part of both patients and the family members who may accompany them to disclosure visits. Several protocols have been developed to advance this idea. For instance, Vanderschaeghe and colleagues have applied International Guideline for Good Clinical Practice to the disclosure of amyloid PET scan results ( 9 ). Other researchers have suggested completion of educational sessions of both verbal and written information prior to imaging and assessment of willingness to receive results during the disclosure session ( 10 , 11 ), as well as developing educational materials that are comprehensible to a diverse audience of different educational and cultural backgrounds ( 12 ). However, the evaluation of these protocols is limited and the extent to which they satisfy the information and support needs of patients and families is unclear. The purpose of this study, therefore, is to characterize questions and concerns that may arise during the disclosure of amyloid PET scan results. Understanding the issues identified as important to patients and family members will contribute to the development of best practices for clinicians communicating the results of amyloid imaging and other AD biomarker tests. Methods Sample Population and Setting The study sample was drawn from the Return of Amyloid Imaging Scan Result (RAISR; R01AG046906), a longitudinal experimental study to determine the effects of receiving amyloid PET results among individuals with MCI. Participants with MCI and their care partners were recruited through the University of Pittsburgh Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC). The inclusion criteria were: current consensus-based MCI diagnosis, ability to provide informed consent, and residence within 100 miles from the institute to facilitate home interviews for follow-up visits. The exclusion criteria were: knowledge of a familial AD genetic mutation, and presence of active, untreated depressive or anxiety disorders. Care partners had to be 18 years of age or older and provide informed consent. Further details of recruitment methods for the parent study, RAISR, can be found elsewhere ( 13 ). In RAISR, a total of 82 dyads were recruited and 42 dyads were randomized into the scan opportunity arm. Eight dyads were lost through attrition prior to the scan opportunity due to various reasons including difficulties within the patient and study partner dynamic and losing contact. The final sample available for the current analysis was 34 participant-care partner dyads. This study was reviewed by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board. As part of the RAISR study protocol, amyloid PET results were disclosed in-person at the ADRC, in the presence of both members of the dyad. Disclosure sessions were conducted by either one of three physicians (one neurologist, two geriatric psychiatrists) or a neuropsychologist, each of whom underwent formal results disclosure training, including review of the protocol and opportunities to practice disclosures using role play. Participants who elected to pursue amyloid PET results were randomly assigned to one of the four clinicians. Audio recordings of disclosure sessions were audited, at random, to ensure protocol adherence. Most disclosure sessions were held within 2 months of the PET scan, however there were some variations due to scheduling challenges. The sessions included delivery of scripted information about the scan result, which was based on the Pittsburgh disclosure protocol for amyloid PET in MCI. Following a script, the disclosing clinician introduced the purpose of the session, provided reminder of the type of testing performed, gave a brief overview of the finding (result type) and concluded with an explanation of the result and recommendations for maintaining brain health and following up. Result types were presented as showing “significant amyloid build up” or not. The term “significant” was identified during pilot work to convey that a threshold of amyloid beta plaque accumulation had been met, while avoiding labeling that level as high. This scripted portion of the disclosure session was followed by an opportunity for the dyad to freely ask questions and for the clinician to use remainder of the participants’ clinical research data to tailor their responses. The sequence of the disclosure session visit is demonstrated in Figure 1 . Descriptive Data Sociodemographic information of both members of the dyad were collected including age, race, gender, and level of education. As an inclusion criterion to the study, both participants and care partners were assessed for their decisional capacity, using the University of California, San Diego Brief Assessment of Capacity to Consent (UBACC) with adequate capacity based on a cut off score of ≥14( 14 ). Qualitative Data Collection and Analysis All 34 interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim into text form. Content analysis was performed for a qualitative description of the questions asked by the participants and their care partners during the open-ended portion of the disclosure session ( 15 ). Line by line coding of all disclosure transcripts was conducted by at least one researcher to identify categories, with a focus on categorizing the frequency and nature of questions raised by the dyads, which were also reviewed by the principal investigator for appropriateness of the categorization. To ensure consistency and accuracy in interpretation of qualitative data among coders, and to measure inter-rater reliability using Cohen’s kappa coefficient, 2 of the 34 interviews were randomly chosen for triple coding which was performed by two other staff members. After consensus among coders was verified, the 2 staff members coded an additional 5 transcripts in total (2 and 3 transcripts, respectively). Therefore, a total of 7 (20.6%) of the interviews were coded by at least 2 staff members to generate a κ coefficient >0.7. Any discrepancies that were raised were discussed and resolved with the principal investigator and the project coordinator. Comprehension of Results Immediately following the disclosure session, a 5-question Comprehension of Results (COR) was separately administered to each participant and care partner by an independent research staff to quantify the level of comprehension of the information conveyed. As previously described ( 16 ), this instrument was adapted from one used in the Risk Evaluation and Education for Alzheimer’s Disease (REVEAL) studies ( 17 ) and consisted 2 open-ended and 3 multiple-choice questions. Each item can be scored 0 (inadequate comprehension) or 1 (adequate comprehension), and for open-ended items, an additional option of 0.5 (partial comprehension), and the participants received a total score ranging from 0–5, with half points. In cases of uncertainty of scoring, research staff met with the principal investigator to discuss the response and achieve consensus. The level of comprehension among elevated versus non-elevated amyloid group participants and their care partners were compared for significant differences using Mann-Whitney U test. Furthermore, the correlation between number of questions asked by participants and their care partners during the disclosure session, and their level of comprehension was computed using Spearman’s rank correlation. Results The 34 dyads in the scan opportunity arm did not statistically differ on any key characteristics from the non-scan group( 13 ). This subsample was mostly white with 29 Caucasian dyads (85.3%). Nineteen participants (55.9%) identified themselves as male, whereas 9 care partners (26.5%) were male. The mean age for participants and care partners were 73.4(SD=8.0) and 67.3(SD=11.2), respectively. The dyads were predominantly well-educated, with 31 participants (91.2%) and 29 care partners (85.3%) having completed at least 13 years of education. Twenty care partners (58.8%) were spouses/domestic partners in relation to the participants. Further demographic characteristics of the participants and care partners are provided in Table 1 . Following the delivery of the scripted information on the participant’s scan results, most dyads continued the discussion and asked pertinent questions extending the result disclosure session. There were two cases where participants who received a “no significant amyloid build up” result declined the opportunity to ask questions, expressing satisfaction with their results. Questions posed by the remaining participants and their family members fell into six main categories: questions about AD and MCI, next steps to take given the result, clarification of results disclosed, resources outside of the ADRC, requests regarding the PET scan images, and ‘other’. Our analysis also revealed that interspersed within these questions were comments reflecting the need for emotional support in discussions of amyloid PET scan results. Questions in the category of AD/MCI (n=107questions) were raised most frequently, and they concerned the definition of dementia or MCI, other types of dementia, the natural progression of the disease, and risk factors for AD. For example, one participant asked “How does Alzheimer’s progress? I mean, like, today I feel okay, once in a while, I forget little things.” Questions regarding risk factors for AD/MCI were exemplified by this question from a participant “Where does heredity fit in the prognosis?” There were eight cases where either the participant or the care partner had questions about the progression of AD/MCI and how their or their partners’ cognitive status might change over the next couple of years. Five of those eight questions were from dyads with positive scan results. Questions regarding next steps given the PET scan results (n=66) were the second most common and included questions about pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment options and opportunities to participate in other research studies, especially new clinical trials. Participants also asked disclosers what other immediate actions should be taken, such as communicating scan results to other family members. An example of a question asked by a participant about pharmacologic treatment was “Are there medications that if you’re diagnosed with it… do they have medications?” An example of questions of nonpharmacologic treatment asked by a care partner was “Does it have anything to do with diet? I know exercise—they say the more you exercise the better you are…what I’m saying to you is, what are the stimulating things?” One of the questions about family communication was “Now, what do I say to my kids, or what should they know?” Clarification of results provided include questions on the significance of “positive” or “negative” result terminology. There were 6 questions about the term “significant”. A quote from a care partner was “Your definition of ‘significant’ would be comparable to what?” There was some misinterpretation that positive scan result meant that the participant was positive for AD. For instance, a participant asked, “And does that necessarily mean absolutely Alzheimer’s?” Another quote from a participant suggesting this belief was “I got that part… but it’s the rest that ok, I know I have it ”, which the care partner corrected by stating “ But, you should be careful of your language because you just said, “I know I have it”. You don’t have Alzheimer’s .” In contrast, some participants who received a negative scan result had misinterpreted the result due to the connotation of ‘negative’, which is demonstrated in the quote “It’s probably results when she was interviewed that she didn’t want me to get these results, ‘cause she felt that if it was negative, I would react negatively to it.” There were fewer but nonetheless noteworthy questions about resources outside of the ADRC services (n=3), request to see the PET scan image (n=5) and receipt of a copy of the image (n=6). All questions concerning other resources were about access to support groups. A quote demonstrating this was: “Do you have – are there support groups with MCI?” Participants or care partners who requested to see the scan (n=3) often wanted to see a comparison scan, “Do you have one there to show the difference?” , and 2 participants wanted to take the scan with them to bring to their primary care providers, “ Can we have the results this center of doctor? Or maybe a copy them that I can give it to him” . Additionally, there were a substantial number of questions(n=56) around study logistics (e.g., how many participants are there total), however, these questions were excluded from the analysis as they were specific to the study design and have limited application to the current practice of amyloid PET disclosure. The questions and comments raised suggested that dyads generally had an acceptable understanding of their scan results. However, there were instances in which participants or care partners may have misinterpreted the results. In one dyad, the participant attempted to clarify the significance of their results by asking, “with my MCI, would you say I’m in the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease?” , to which the care partner added, “you have dementia” , and the clinician corrects the dyad, “You have MCI” . At times, questions regarding terminology were contextualized by qualifying statements regarding prior experiences with diagnostic testing, “Now I found out what positive stands for, you see that through her cancer, ‘cause I never knew what.” Some participants also struggled with the idea of a dichotomous result, and posed questions such as “It’s on a continuum—it’s not a plus or minus test, it’s a continuum and scale of one to ten, we were two—something like that?” Despite the instances of initial misinterpretation of results, of note, comprehension assessment (COR) that were administered upon completion of the question and answer (Q&A) session demonstrated that the participants and care partners had adequate comprehension of the amyloid PET results. From the scoring criteria of 0 to 5, 28/34(82.4%) participants and care partners scored 5/5, and 30 participants (88.2%) and 32 care partners (94.1%) scored at least 4 on the assessment scale. Following a Mann-Whitney U analysis, the level of comprehension of results did not significantly differ among participants (U(n=32)=97, z=−0.921, p=0.357) and care partners (U(n=31)=103.5, z=−0.462, p=0.644) who had elevated versus non-elevated amyloid PET results (see Table 2 ). Based on the Spearman’s rank correlation, there was no significant correlation between the number of questions asked by participants and their comprehension of results score (n=32, r=−0.065, p=0.725). However, there was a positive correlation between number of questions asked by care partners, and their comprehension of results score (n=31, r=0.370, p=0.040). Discussion This qualitative study of 34 individuals with MCI and their care partners aimed to explore the nature and range of questions and concerns that were outstanding following the protocolized disclosure of amyloid PET scan results. We found that both participants and their care partners were actively involved in the conversation and asked relevant questions. The six main categories of questions asked by dyads provide insight into to the psychosocial and informational needs that may arise immediately following the disclosure of a cognitively symptomatic individual’s biomarker status. Despite having a sample of highly educated adults, participants at times struggled with the phrasing “significant build-up” of amyloid and how it relates to “positive” and “negative” scan results, necessitating follow-up clarification on such terminology. Of note, the terms “positive” and “negative” were not introduced by clinicians as part of the scripted results disclosure, owing to previously documented problems with these easily misunderstood terms ( 16 ). Nevertheless, these terms were used, at times inaccurately, by participants and families during the Q&A period. The challenges of disclosing positive and negative scan results using lay-friendly terminology are consistent with a mixed-methods study of 1,845 participants with MCI or dementia and their care partners, which found that while most participants correctly recalled their result type, there was variation in how accurately the meaning of such results were understood by dyads ( 11 ). The terminology used during high stakes medical encounters such as the disclosure of AD biomarker status may impact the understanding of the results and bring about unintended psychosocial outcomes ( 9 , 18 ). Our findings add to a growing literature suggesting the need for cautious selection and usage of language and underscore the need for the field to work towards harmonizing the language used for communication about AD related biomarkers to research participants, patients, and families. The question raised from one participant about the presence of a continuum rather than a dichotomy of amyloid positivity and negativity was consistent with findings from a qualitative study of 50 cognitively normal, elevated amyloid participants who expressed a desire for more dimensional and quantitative information ( 19 ). Biomarkers in medicine are often presented using a normal vs. abnormal cut points to support management decisions, and this is appropriate in the ADRD setting as these demarcations serve to establish eligibility for clinical trials ( 20 ). However, our results suggest that the reporting of any AD biomarker test result should provide clear guidance on the degree of abnormality if requested by participants, to guide discussions, especially in the case of the existence of a potential “gray zone”( 21 ). Such information may be presented using a visual analog graphic which would align well with a Centiloid scale that places results on a 0(amyloid negative) to 100(typical AD patient) continuum of amyloid positivity ( 22 , 23 ). There were also instances in which participants or their care partners requested to see their amyloid PET scan image, or a clearly positive and negative comparator scan, as a visual aid to better understand their results. In response, our team modified the protocol mid-way to include sharing the participants’ images as part of the disclosure session. Preferences for viewing one’s own scan (rather than an example scan from an information packet) were consistent with suggestions for best practices from a focus group of pilot study participants who felt that seeing their own scan images would make their results less abstract ( 16 ). Implications for Clinical Practice With increasing evidence of the clinical utility of amyloid PET scans, more patients and their care partners will be exposed to AD biomarker results in non-research settings ( 24 , 25 ). This may be especially the case with the increasing effort in refining blood-based biomarker testing ( 26 , 27 ) and decisions by payers like the Veterans’ Health Administration to cover the anti-amyloid drug therapy, lecanemab ( 28 ). In many ways, the current report depicts Q&A sessions following amyloid PET disclosure under the most favorable of circumstances in terms of resources, as suggested by our finding that asking more questions leads to better comprehension of amyloid PET results by family members who are presumably cognitively unimpaired. The disclosure of amyloid PET result in the RAISR study occurred under highly controlled conditions including: rigorous training for the disclosing clinicians, recording and auditing of disclosure sessions for protocol adherence, pre-test counseling of participants on the implications of the results, and ample opportunities for participants to ask questions arising before, during or after results disclosure. Yet, clinicians in RAISR and other studies continuously face challenges of aligning their communication to meet the education and support needs that may be unique to each patient and family. In clinical settings where patients are not guaranteed resources like pre-test counseling and post-disclosure support, the potential for such a mismatch patient may be exacerbated. Guidelines and recommendations emerging at both at international ( 9 ) and local levels ( 29 ) rightly highlight the importance of assessing and ensuring comprehension of results among patients and family members. In the United States, the current policy of 21 st Century Cures Act that mandates that patients to have full access to their health information, meaning that patients may encounter biomarker results for the first time through online platforms such as patient portals, with even more limited opportunities to ask questions about the implications of their test results ( 30 ). Patients and their family members need opportunities to ask questions to clarify scan results, however, at this time, no digitized version of results disclosure can provide this level of patient-centeredness. The evolving practice of online testing access also opens up possibilities for unintended disclosure of biomarker status to third parties such as medical professional and insurance companies, which may subject patients to potential harms of stigma, discrimination, and changes to insurance status due to expectations of a future clinical diagnosis of AD dementia ( 30 ). While pre-test counseling sessions in the RAISR study included content on the potential for such unintentional consequences, the current analysis did not reveal concerns about discrimination to be an immediate priority when results were disclosed in the context of a research study. Disclosure of ones’ biomarker results may increase transparency in medical research and clinical settings; however, it is the duty of scientists and clinicians to consider the ethical concerns that may occur from misinterpretation ( 12 , 31 , 32 ). The findings of this study highlight the need for cautious selection and usage of lay language that leaves little room for misinterpretation during disclosure of biomarker results, and the need for comprehension checks and ongoing support for people with MCI and their family care partners. Clinicians may direct patients to online resources such as the Advisory Group on Risk Evidence Education for Dementia (AGREEDementia), an international working group of scientists and clinicians, which provide support tools for amyloid PET decision. As the field of AD research moves in an era of blood-based biomarker testing, additional clear and widely accessible resources are needed. Limitations The primary limitation of the study is the homogenous sample of highly educated Caucasian adults. While this sample reflects the ADRC cohort from which individuals were recruited, findings of the analysis may not be generalizable to other older adults living with MCI in the community. A body of literature discusses the challenges of recruiting diverse samples in the cognitively impaired population due to the invasive and time-consuming nature of the research procedures, potential emotional distress from the results of the study, as well as historically unethical practices of research with persons from minoritized groups ( 33 , 34 ). In addition, the inclusion criterion of requiring a research partner throughout the duration of the months-long study may lead to selection of people that may have relatively more support and resources ( 35 ). It is imperative to recruit a more diverse study sample for future studies of AD biomarker disclosure as there may be culturally salient variations in how individuals come to understand and cope with such information. This information is essential for development of clinical guidelines on AD biomarker disclosure that is relevant to all populations. Conclusion With the emergence of anti-amyloid therapies in both research and clinical settings, clinicians and investigators are increasingly challenged to familiarize themselves with disclosing biomarker results to cognitively impaired patients and their family members. The findings of this study capture initial responses of the dyad to their amyloid PET results and highlight areas where patients and families commonly ask additional questions during the disclosure session.