INTRODUCTION While important progress has been achieved in understanding the medical, neuroimaging, genomic, and neurobiological substrates of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related dementias, identifying individuals at a preclinical stage remains an urgent, unmet need. Individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), especially amnestic MCI, are at increased risk for progression to dementia, with an annualized conversion rate between 3–15% [ 1 ]. Although a proportion of those with MCI will revert back to normal or remain stable, amnestic MCI generally reflects the earliest symptomatic phase of a neurodegenerative condition, like AD [ 2 ]. Therapeutic clinical trials for AD have been largely disappointing, likely because the degree of pathological changes in the brain at the point where symptoms first become apparent (i.e., MCI), may be later than ideal to start treatment [ 3 ]. Hence, if the next generation of preclinical trials to prevent or delay the onset of AD is to succeed, it will be imperative to identify those at risk for dementia and intervene at an early asymptomatic stage [ 4 ]. Several approaches to identify at-risk individuals exist. The APOE ε 4 allele is the most common genetic risk variant in sporadic late-onset AD, and the pathologic changes associated with AD are detectable among middle-age adults who are APOE ε 4 carriers [ 5 ]. While APOE ε 4 is positively associated with hallmark AD pathology, its use for clinical prediction remains unsupported, with a positive predictive accuracy for conversion to AD at <0.60, even among those with clinically diagnosed MCI [ 6 ]. Recent developments using in vivo biomarkers of amyloidosis, tauopathy, and neurodegeneration (“A/T/N”) represent a promising approach to identify individuals who are currently asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic yet harbor the pathologic changes associated with AD [ 7 , 8 ]. At present, however, the “A/T/N” framework remains investigational and is premature for use in standard clinical practice [ 9 ]. Importantly, in vivo “A/T/N” biomarkers currently pose a non-trivial per-subject expense, and access to these tests remains limited. In addition, individuals at a preclinical stage have been shown to have lower cognitive test scores [ 10 ], particularly for memory tasks [ 11 ], or lack benefit from normal practice effects [ 12 ]. These cognitive test scores tend to be found at the lower bound of the normal range [ 13 ], and significant overlap exists at the individual level with normal, non-preclinical dementia participants. These challenges suggest that innovative solutions for the detection of at-risk, asymptomatic individuals are needed. Statistical or machine learning (ML) serves as an analytical approach to leverage existing longitudinal studies to detect early cognitive decline [ 14 ]. In dementia research, ML and pattern detection algorithms have been applied predominantly to neuroimaging data, or neuroimaging data combined with clinical and genetic data, to distinguish MCI or AD cases from healthy controls. It remains to be determined whether ML algorithms can be harnessed to identify the earliest detectable stage of incipient decline in cognitively normal individuals [ 15 ]. The current study leverages a longitudinal dataset comprising adults ages 21 years and older who are enriched for APOE ε 4 genotype and cognitively normal at enrollment [ 16 ]. What distinguishes this dataset from many others is the abundant demographic, medical, psychological/personality, and cognitive data collected from asymptomatic adults and adults who convert to MCI, lending itself to use of the ML paradigm. This study sought to investigate whether variations amongst longitudinally-collected demographic, medical, genetic, psychological/personality and cognitive measures are predictive of cognitive decline and incident MCI. This work hypothesized that a machine learning approach utilizing the worst performing scores in neuropsychological measures prior to MCI conversion (i.e., global minima/maxima) would classify incident MCI cases versus normal controls (NCs) with a high degree of accuracy, at least 1–2 years prior to MCI conversion ( Fig. 1A ). The machine learning workflow developed may identify prognosticators of diagnostic change which might elude clinical observation or remain undetectable via conventional statistical regression techniques. Such an algorithm to estimate each person’s unique risk of future MCI diagnosis may provide a cost-effective method of identifying those with high risk of preclinical dementia. MATERIALS AND METHODS Participant characteristics This study included data from 610 cognitively normal individuals and 66 MCI converters who participated in the ‘ APOE in the Predisposition to, Protection from and Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease’ study, described previously [ 17 ]. Individuals at risk of AD due to their apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) genotype were recruited from January 1, 1994, through June 30, 2016. Participants completed comprehensive medical history screenings, neuropsychological testing, and mood and behavior assessments every one to two years (epoch). Individuals with suspected MCI were identified by consensus of two behavioral neurologists and a neuropsychologist. MCI suspects (i) endorsed symptoms of memory loss (which was corroborated by a close informant) and (ii) exhibited decline in performance that consistently affected multiple neuropsychological tests within the same cognitive domain. Individuals with suspect MCI then completed a clinical neurological evaluation with standard laboratory and radiological assessments, following which formal MCI diagnosis was made [ 17 – 19 ]. Figure 2 contains a condensed list of neuropsychology measures. In addition, detailed demographic information were obtained (for a complete list of measures, see Supplementary Table 1 ). The current study included participants with baseline data and at least one epoch of follow-up. To maximize pathology similarity, this study excluded a limited number of participants later diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease ( n = 10) (for sample inclusion, Supplementary Figure 1 ). Data preprocessing As this study utilized a longitudinal design, applicable cognitive assessment scores were adjusted for age (see Supplementary Table 1 for items and preprocessing details). The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) was removed due to the circularity that a change on this measure is equivalent to progression. For sociodemographic measures that remain consistent across time (e.g., genotype, ethnicity), the data collected at baseline were included in modeling. For medical and sociodemographic variables that change with time (e.g., age, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, years married, number of divorces), the highest value observed at any of the visits was included in modeling as higher values are associated with higher MCI risk [ 20 , 21 ]. For each cognitive or psychological measure for each patient, the worst performing score over time (i.e., global minima/maxima, depending on measure) was selected for use in predictive modeling ( Fig. 1B ). As change in score from baseline measurement may itself be informative, score change from baseline was also included as a predictor. Score change was calculated as follows: for individuals who did not convert to MCI (NCs), the difference between baseline and final score was recorded. For individuals who converted to MCI, the difference between baseline and the visit prior MCI diagnosis was utilized. This enabled prediction of future MCI in individuals who were still cognitively normal, one epoch prior to MCI diagnosis. If data were missing at these timepoints, values were filled with the nearest observation, unless the nearest observation was the first occurrence of MCI, in which case it remained missing. Following this imputation, features with >15% missingness and samples with >20% were excluded. Remaining missing data were imputed through K-nearest neighbor’s (KNN) imputation [ 22 ]. Nominal and categorical variables, including number of ε 4 alleles and ethnicity, were recoded as ordinal numerical values and binary values, respectively. Verbal survey scale responses were also recoded as ordinal numerical variables. Predictive model development A random forest-based algorithm was used to predict the onset of MCI ( Fig. 3 ). First, the entire cohort was randomly split into training (75% of cohort) and testing sets. This random split was performed three times to assess the robustness of the models and to avoid overfitting. A consensus of the results were taken. Fivefold cross-validation with three repeats was used on the training set to tune a grid of hyper-parameters ( mtry and minimum number of predictors per node), with five values each. The number of trees was set to 500. Synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) [ 23 ] was used to accommodate for the class imbalance between individuals who did and who did not convert to MCI in the training set. The best model in terms of the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was selected for testing on the remaining 25% of the data, and performance was assessed by AUC, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy as compared to the null information rate (NIR) in the testing set. Accuracy should be interpreted as the percentage of all individuals correctly identified rather than the conversion group. The NIR is defined as the percentage of individuals in the majority class of the outcome being predicted in the test dataset and is used a as proxy for chance [ 24 – 26 ]. Presently, the NIR represented the percent of subjects in the testing group that did not convert to MCI (91%–93%, varying by the train/test split). To assess the replicability of results and top predictors across multiple supervised machine learning approaches, additional algorithms were tuned and tested. These included extreme gradient boosted decision trees (XGBoost), support vector machines with a linear and a radial basis function kernel (SVM linear, SVM RBF), and penalized regression. Importantly, the methods employed are all suited for high dimensional data, in which the number of predictive features may be greater than the number of samples in each outcome class [ 27 ]. Additionally, these approaches are well-suited for collinear data, as in the case of multiple neuropsychology measures [ 28 ]. These methods, therefore, were selected to find the predictive signals among the large number of measured variables. Prior to SVM and penalized regression modeling, features were centered at 0 and scaled to unit variance. Variable importance was evaluated for the final tuned models, using permutation-based variable importance approaches. Variable importance was calculated by assessing the error introduced after the removal of each model variable [ 29 ]. All models were developed using the tidymodels package [ 30 ] implemented in R studio build 492 [ 31 ], with R v4.0.3 [ 32 ]. Predictive modeling excluding key variables Additional models were generated using the same methods (described in the ‘ Predictive Model Development ’ section) to assess the predictability of MCI conversion using a) medical and demographic information only, and b) all measures in the original models except the memory measures, which were the strongest predictors. For a list of predictors included in each set of additional models, please see Supplementary Table 1 . Score trajectory comparison Longitudinal score trajectories were visualized for the top four variables of importance to better understand the trajectory of scores for MCI converters and NCs throughout study participation. This enables visualization of performance prior to and following the onset of MCI. Differences in norm-derived score trajectory between individuals who converted to MCI and NCs were assessed using the LOESS (Local Polynomial Regression Fitting) technique. Additionally, the baseline variable scores were compared between MCI converters and NCs using t -tests. Examining MCI conversion by individual top predictors Next, it was assessed whether a threshold could be derived for each top predictor variable to classify MCI conversion (e.g., “Can an age-adjusted AVLT long term memory score of less than ‘X’ predict MCI with a high positive predictive value?”). Area under the receiver operating curve (AUC) was calculated for the top four variables of importance and the optimal threshold for classifying future MCI versus no MCI was determined by maximizing PPV. PPV, NPV, true positive rate, false positive rate, true negative rate, and false negative rate were calculated and reported for observed variable scores, and variable score distributions and optimal cut points were plotted individually for MCI converters and non-converters. Lastly, global minima or maxima and score adjacency to MCI conversion was calculated for each top predictor variable. Time elapsed to global maxima or minima scores as well as conversion to MCI was measured as months since study enrollment. Generalized linear models (GLMs) determined if occurrence of worst-performing scores (x) related to timepoint of MCI conversion (y). Coefficient estimates, z -values, and associated p -values were recorded. Frequency and percentage of global minima or maxima occurring within the epoch prior to the epoch of MCI diagnosis was obtained. RESULTS Participant characteristics Sample characteristics can be found in Table 1 . Sixty-six individuals converted to MCI and 610 remained cognitively normal over their duration of study participation. Participation lasted a median of 11.5 years for individuals who converted to MCI. The median time to conversion was 8.5 years (range 1.2 to 21.2 years). For individuals who did not convert, median study duration was 8.8 years, (range 1.1 to 23.1 years). Individuals who converted to MCI were older at study enrollment, with a mean age at enrollment of 65.6 years compared to 56.4 years for those who remained cognitively normal. There was a larger proportion of APOE ε 4 carriers amongst individuals who converted to MCI (70.6% compared with 41.4%). There was a smaller proportion of women in the group who converted to MCI (56.1%) compared to women who remained cognitively normal (74.8%). Education and family history of dementia were comparable between MCI converters and NCs. Predictive model development Using the testing set, the random forest algorithm achieved 97% accuracy [ p ≤ 0.01; confidence interval (CI): 96%–97%] in predicting the onset of MCI at least one epoch (1–2 years) prior to diagnosis. This model had a 97% negative predictive value (NPV) (CI: 97%–98%) and 88% positive predictive value (PPV) (CI 77%–100%) ( Table 2 ). The additional supervised machine learning approaches (XGBoost, SVM linear, penalized regression, and SVM RBF) achieved predictive accuracies of 96%, 94%, 91%, and 86%. respectively ( Supplementary Table 2 ). For XGBoost, the raw p-value comparing accuracy of models with the null-information rate was ≤0.05, with a PPV of 76% (CI: 60–93%). For the remaining models, the raw p -values were ≥.05 ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Top predictor variables For the random forest model (which utilized all cognitive, demographic, medical, genetic, and psychological variables), the top predictors by variable importance included items of the i) the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT), ii) Selective Reminding Test (SRT), and iii) Dementia Rating Scale (DRS) ( Fig. 4 ). Long-term and short-term memory scores as well as total learning, recall percentage, and learning over time were represented in the AVLT features. Both immediate and delayed (free and cued) recall were in the top predictors for the SRT. AVLT and SRT items were also represented amongst the top ten variables of the XGBoost model ( Supplementary Table 3 ). Age was not found to be a top predictor of MCI conversion. Predictive modeling excluding key variables Next, it was assessed whether conversion to MCI is predictable in this dataset from a) medical and demographic items alone or b) all variables excluding the memory domain, given the high importance of memory domain measures in the developed models. Using medical and demographic items alone, the maximum resulting accuracy was 94% (PPV = 0.67), which is not significantly different from the NIR (92%) ( p = 0.21) ( Supplementary Table 4 ). In models excluding the memory-domain items (AVLT, SRT, complex figure test [CFT] recall, and Weschler memory scale [WMS]), the resulting accuracy was 94% (PPV = 0.69; p = 0.24) ( Supplementary Table 5 ). Score trajectory comparison The machine learning models consistently demonstrated that the AVLT and SRT items had high importance in predicting development of MCI. Therefore, the mean scores at study entry and the trajectories in the age-adjusted variables with highest importance (AVLT long term memory and AVLT total learning) were compared for individuals who converted to MCI and NCs. Comparison of the mean entry scores by T -test demonstrated that entry score for each of the four variables differed significantly for converters compared with non-converters (AVLT long term memory [ t = 6.0; p = 5.6e–8] and AVLT total learning [ t = 6.2; p = 2.1e–8]). For all measures, trajectory analysis demonstrated that individuals who convert to MCI decline over time in these measures (adjusted for age), both prior to and after conversion. In contrast, NCs demonstrate an initial improvement in score followed by relatively consistent scores across time, as well as statistically significant higher baseline scores ( Fig. 5 ). The decline in performance for these measures is reflected in decreasing scores ( Fig. 5 ). Examining MCI conversion by individual top predictors Thresholds which maximize the positive predictive value for each of the four variables of most importance in the random forest-based prediction of MCI conversion were calculated ( Supplementary Table 6 , Supplementary Figure 2 ). This analysis was undertaken with the goal of determining cut-points in these measures to predict future MCI onset. The optimal threshold for age-adjusted AVLT long term memory was 1, which yielded a PPV of 0.79 and a NPV of 0.96. For AVLT total learning, the optimal threshold was 7 (PPV = 1.0, NPV = 0.90). For SRT immediate cued recall, the optimal threshold was 60 (PPV = 0.8, NPV = 0.92). For SRT immediate free recall, the optimal threshold was 33 (PPV = 0.94, NPV = 0.92) ( Supplementary Figure 2 ). For all four predictors, the GLMs of MCI conversion timepoint predicting timepoint of worst-performing scores resulted in significant p -values ( p < 0.001) ( Supplementary Table 7 ). β values were positive for all coefficients and predictors, indicating a positive correlation between timepoint of global minima and timepoint of MCI conversion. For AVLT long term memory and total learning, the global minima occurred 1 epoch prior to MCI conversion for 22.1% ( N = 15) and 11.8% ( N = 8) of MCI converters. For SRT immediate free recall and cue recall, the global minima occurred 1 epoch prior to MCI conversion for 30.1% ( N = 21) and 14.8% ( N = 10) of MCI converters. DISCUSSION Using medical, genetic, and neuropsychological measures collected over the span of 24 years, the onset of MCI was predicted with 97% test accuracy ( p = 0.0026) in cognitively normal subjects, one “epoch” (1–2 years) prior to MCI diagnosis. The high specificity rate (99%) reflects the model’s strength in accurately identifying non-converters. Supervised machine learning algorithms that utilized the worst performing scores from longitudinally-collected cognitive and psychological measures enabled successful prediction of MCI conversion despite low incidence rate (7.5%). This technique represents an approach towards quickly assessing large amounts of longitudinal data by detecting low performance in a patient’s history. Of the battery of demographic, medical and neurocognitive data collected (e.g., APOE ε 4 genotypes, hypertension history, diabetes history, sleep quality, age, education, personality assessments, depression scales, and cognitive measures), memory-domain items were consistently the strongest predictors of MCI onset across multiple supervised machine learning models. Interestingly, age was not found to be a top predictor of MCI onset. This finding validates and advances our understanding of the value of memory-domain measures in predicting conversion to MCI. Using medical and demographic items alone, the maximum resulting accuracy was not significantly above chance. Therefore, despite significant differences in age and APOE ε 4 genotype between MCI converters and NCs, medical history items considered in the absence of memory-related neurocognitive measures appear to be insufficient in predicting the onset of MCI. Furthermore, incorporating relevant neurocognitive measures (e.g., executive function, visuospatial) alongside medical and demographic predictors in the absence of memory measures does not accurately predict conversion to MCI, underscoring the importance of memory-domain measures in predicting MCI conversion 1–2 years prior to diagnosis. Approximately 43% of the included cohort were carriers for APOE ε 4 genotype, suggesting generalizability to the general population. The trajectories over time of the top predictive variables for MCI converters and NCs were examined. Interestingly, individuals who remain cognitively normal for the duration of the study demonstrated an initial increase in performance, which may reflect practice effects on neurocognitive tests. This increase is not observed for MCI converters, whose performance trajectory follows a pattern of worsening memory performance. Similar practice-effect differences among converters/nonconverters to MCI have been reported by others [ 12 ]. Trajectory plots also show that individuals who convert to MCI perform worse than non-converters at baseline. While a small number of individuals would have been classified as impaired (≥1.5 SD below the mean) at baseline on a memory measure (AVLT Total Learning = 5% converters, 11% non-converters; AVLT LTM = 8% of converters and non-converters; SRT Free Recall Total = 0% converters,<1% noncoverters; SRT Free+Cued Delay = 0% converters and 13% nonconverters), all participants were judged at study baseline to have normal cognition. The normal distribution of scores in a population would predict some individuals who are normal to have an impaired score on a test. Further, impaired performance on one of these tests at baseline was not related to who converted to MCI or not, highlighting 1) the importance of clinical judgment at baseline to correctly classify individuals into diagnostic categories (i.e., normal, MCI, dementia) and 2) while generally lower on memory items at baseline, our MCI converters were not just impaired from the onset. Because memory items were highly predictive, an analysis was undertaken to identify whether these measures could independently identify risk thresholds for MCI. Individuals who convert to MCI demonstrated significantly lower scores at baseline compared to NCs in each of the top four predictive memory variables. However, assessing the positive predictive value (PPV) of multiple thresholds in each top measure demonstrates that MCI conversion cannot confidently be predicted from single items. These items have low true positive rates and high false negative rates, even after optimizing for PPV. The thresholds that maximized the PPV for each item suggest that very poor performance on the measures is necessary to discern MCI converters and NCs from individual items – for example, the value of the age-adjusted AVLT measurement which optimized PPV was 1, which yielded a PPV of 0.79. An age-adjusted AVLT performance score of 1 is significantly lower than average, indicating that these threshold will be of little utility to the average patient. This contrasts with studies of conversion from MCI to AD, which show high PPV and NPV from cognitive assessment, particularly for memory tasks [ 33 ]. Across global minima for top predictors, percentage occurring 1 epoch prior to MCI conversion for patients was variable. The overall occurrence of global maxima or minima scores was significantly proximal to timepoint of MCI conversion according to GLM results, indicating the value of the memory scores as predictors in machine learning algorithms that decipher patterns amongst multiple memory measures and medical/sociodemographic data to achieve high accuracy in predicting patient conversion to MCI. This study has limitations. Because MCI is a clinical syndrome, our work helps predict worsening of cognitive/behavioral symptoms rather than the progression of biological biomarkers or underlying neurodegeneration. High rates of missingness (>15%) precluded the inclusion of potentially influential medical and demographic indicators, such as body mass index, medication history, and income category. The absence of semantic fluency measures is an additional limitation as semantic fluency changes can be an early cognitive change in mild cognitive impairment. Participants were largely non-Hispanic Caucasian adults, limiting generalizability to additional populations. The duration of study participation was longer on average for the group which converted to MCI. High model accuracy (97%) came with high NPV (97%) and specificity (99%), and relatively lower PPV (88%) and specificity (71%). Accordingly, 99% of individuals without MCI are correctly classified, while 71% of individuals with MCI are correctly classified. The relatively higher NPV and specificity than PPV and sensitivity may reflect the unbalanced nature of the dataset, with the majority of the patients (90%) being non-converters. As this work sought to determine the best predictors for achieving a balance between correctly identifying both converters and non-converters, AUC was optimized for in model selection. However, future studies with the goal of obtaining high PPV or sensitivity can optimize for these metrics in model selection and thus attempt to reduce false positives and enhance detection of true positives. In the absence of external validation cohorts, we accounted for model generalizability as best as possible through a) repeated train/test splits and b) cross validation during model training, but we lacked an independent dataset to assess the generalizability of the models. This cohort was chosen for initial model generation due to the extensive background and medical history information, as well as the neuropsychology testing. These measures are more extensive than those of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) datasets. This dataset was used to inform, amongst many potentially relevant variables, which are the most predictive of MCI. Future studies are needed to retrain new models to determine whether high predictability can be achieved across cohorts, using the smaller number of overlapping features common to the ADNI or NACC studies. Additionally, change scores were assessed from first to last study visit only. Accounting for each timepoint in between introduces additional technical complexity and should be incorporated in future modeling. Few individuals in the current study progressed to dementia, necessitating additional cohorts to study the top predictors of conversion to dementia/AD and compare their overlap with MCI predictors (Fig. 6). Conclusion In conclusion, this study demonstrates that prediction of conversion to MCI 1–2 years prior to diagnosis is possible with memory assessment measures and machine learning techniques. Integrating the worst performing scores in neuropsychological measures over time (i.e., global minima/maxima) into the modeling enabled sensitive and specific prediction of future MCI from longitudinal measurements. While strong correlates of MCI conversion (e.g., APOE ε 4 genotypes, age) differed between MCI converters and NC’s, these alone were insufficient to accurately predict conversion. However, combining multiple sociodemographic factors with neuropsychological test measures achieves strong prediction of conversion to MCI on an individual-patient basis, 1–2 years prior to said conversion. The current approach provides a foundation to integrate longitudinal data to predict onset of additional etiologies of preclinical dementia or conversion of MCI to other non-AD dementias. Ultimately, determination and validation of top predictive measures may enable clinicians to monitor patients’ health more effectively. Supplementary Material