Non‐Hispanic Black (NHB) men and women have a 2.0 to 2.5 times higher prevalence of dementia compared with non‐Hispanic White (NHW) men or women, and among NHB men, the prevalence of Alzheimer's dementia is 2.5 times that among NHW men. For vascular cognitive impairment and dementia (VCID), NHB adults have a ≥2‐fold higher incidence and prevalence of VCID compared with NHW adults. 1 Several studies suggest (perhaps correctly) that differential prevalence of socioeconomic and vascular risk factors contribute to this disparity. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 Others suggest that the disparities in VCID may be partly attributable to: (1) the higher incidence and prevalence of stroke in addition to having a higher burden of cardiovascular risk factors, (2) a more severe impact of acute stroke on NHB individuals, or (3) slower recovery or less cognitive reserve after a stroke in NHB individuals. 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 Recently it was reported from the REGARDS study, that the burden of incident stroke and associated risk factors do not fully account for all the observed disparity in cognitive impairment between NHB and NHW individuals. 10 11 Recently cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) has been recognized as a potent but unrecognized contributor to the development of cognitive impairment and dementia. , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 CSVD is detectable by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) changes reflecting pathology in the penetrating (perforating) vessels in the brain, often without overt clinical feature as in acute stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA). Components of CSVD include cerebral microbleeds (CMBs), white matter hyperintensity (WMH) lesions, lacunes, and enlarged perivascular spaces (ePVSs). 17 , 18 , 19 The presence of individual components of CSVD and the overall burden of CSVD are associated with vascular risk factors and with incidence and prevalence of cognitive impairment and dementia. 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 Other studies have shown an association of CSVD with prevalence and pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRDs). 28 , 21 , 29 , 30 31 We hypothesize that among people who have had stroke or TIA, the Black–White disparity in the prevalence and burden of CSVD contributes to the Black–White disparity in the prevalence and trajectory of VCID and ADRD. Also, because the occurrence of a stroke will not have a large impact on the magnitude of CSVD, these findings may be generalizable beyond the stroke population and could be applicable in the general population. In addition, we hypothesize that differences in the distribution of vascular and ADRD genetic risk factors contribute to the prevalence and burden of CSVD. Methods Because of the sensitive nature of the data collected for this study, requests to access the data set from qualified researchers trained in human subject confidentiality protocols may be sent to the REGARDS (Reasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke) study at regardsadmin@uab.edu . Participant Population The study sample will consist of participants from the REGARDS study, a longitudinal population‐based cohort study designed to investigate factors associated with the excess stroke mortality among NHB individuals in the United States and with emphasis on the residents of the Stroke Belt region, defined as the 8 southern states of North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, Louisiana, and Arkansas. Self‐reported NHB and NHW participants, aged 45 and older, were enrolled from January 2003 to October 2007 resulting in a cohort of 30 239 with ongoing follow‐up. Details of the study design and methods are available elsewhere, including a map showing distribution by state of residence. 32 , 7 Black participants and residents of the stroke belt were oversampled. Participants were enrolled from 1833 counties, ≈60% of the counties in the continental United States. Briefly, verbal informed consent, demographics, socioeconomic factors, and medical history were obtained by computer‐assisted telephone interview. An in‐home physical exam visit was conducted ≈3 to 4 weeks after the interview; the data collected include height and weight, blood pressure measurements, blood and urine samples, an ECG, medication inventory, and written informed consent. Follow‐up is by computer‐assisted telephone interview (or proxy reported in case participant is unable to respond) every 6 months for suspected stroke and cognitive assessment. The institutional review board of each participating institution reviewed and approved by the protocol. 32 Stroke Ascertainment Participants or their proxies are contacted by phone at 6‐month intervals, and information on hospitalizations, emergency department visits, overnight stays in any medical facility, or death is collected. Medical records on all suspected stroke events (admission for stroke, TIA, or stroke/TIA‐like symptoms, or hospitalization for unknown reasons) are then retrieved and adjudicated by a panel of physicians (with at least 1 neurologist reviewing each suspected stroke). , 7 Each case is assigned to 2 physicians who adjudicate the event. Disagreement between the 2 physicians is resolved by a full committee review and retraining is done for an adjudicator when the need arises. Stroke events are defined using World Health Organization criteria published in 1989 33 and the American Heart Association criteria for stroke published in 2013. 33 Further classification of stroke into ischemic and hemorrhagic is also done. Finally, ischemic stroke is classified into subtypes based on the Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment criteria. 34 35 Inclusion criteria for this ancillary study includes all adjudicated incident stroke or TIA cases, that have an MRI scan associated with it and have at least 1 data point for the cognitive evaluation using the Six‐Item Screener (SIS) within 4 years before the stroke or TIA event. Participants who self‐reported a history of stroke at baseline are excluded. Based on the adjudication data available at the time of developing this study, there are a total of 1419 confirmed (adjudicated) stroke cases with MRI. Out of this number, 1362 are confirmed incident ischemic stroke cases and 54 are hemorrhagic stroke cases, and there are 3 confirmed stroke cases with missing stroke type also with MRI. Similarly, there are 391 confirmed incident TIA cases with MRI; these are individuals who had only TIA and have not subsequently developed a stroke at the time of developing this study. Using the SIS tool as the benchmark, all the confirmed stroke and TIA cases with MRI scans (N=1810) have at least 1 baseline (≤4 years before the stroke or TIA event) and 1232 (889 with stroke and 343 with TIA) of these also have at least 1 poststroke or TIA SIS. Finally, 889 (631 with stroke and 258 with TIA) cases have at least 2 pre‐ and 2 poststroke or TIA cognitive assessments. In our final study population, the cognitive assessment modalities include SIS in 1810 participants, word list learning (WLL) in 1477, abbreviated Montreal Cognitive Assessment in 1279, animal naming (fluency) test (AFT) in 1457, and letter F test (LFT) in 1262. The following points warrant highlighting: (1) the final numbers of participants with stroke or TIA and SIS, WLL, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, AFT, and LFT used in study analyses will be higher than stated previously as the parent REGARDS study is ongoing, and by the next adjudication data freeze, we expect the number of confirmed cases to increase by 200 to 250 for stroke and by 50 to 80 for TIA, and (2) the TIA cases are unique: when a participant has both incident stroke and TIA, they are classified only as a stroke case and not as both a TIA and stroke case, for the purpose of the sample size. This would be handled differently in the analysis as described later. Retrieval of Magnetic Resonance Images For suspected stroke events, participants or their proxies are asked the name of the facility where they received most of their evaluation and treatment. Medical records, including radiology reports from MRIs and/or computerized tomography scans, are then requested. The REGARDS Outcomes Unit has maintained a database of names and addresses of these medical facilities since the first reported stroke event in 2003. Based on receipt of the MRI report associated with the confirmed stroke or TIA, requests for the MRIs scans are mailed to the medical facility. As of July 11, 2023, MRI from 1179 participants, with 1290 images, have been retrieved and submitted to image analysis team for visual rating, quantifying white matter (WM) hypersensitivities, and quantifying whole and regional brain gray matter (GM) volume. As this project is ongoing, more MRIs will be retrieved. The racial breakdown is currently 40% NHB and 60% NHW. Currently, about 275 images from ≈220 participants are no longer available from the health care facility and another 87 images cannot be retrieved due to legal reasons beyond our control. Quantification of Cerebral Small Vessel Disease To estimate overall CSVD burden, we will perform visual rating using the Standards for ReportIng Vascular Changes on Neuroimaging international consensus criteria and then apply the method developed, validated, and popularized by Staals et al, and other investigators to develop an overall CSVD burden score. , 22 , 26 , 27 , 36 Although recently new Standards for ReportIng Vascular Changes on Neuroimaging guidelines were published, 37 most MRI scans were completed on scanners without resolution adequate to incorporate newer measures, such as cortical microinfarcts, therefore we will use the earlier criteria. The components of the CSVD burden score are basal ganglia ePVS, CMBs, lacunes, and WMH lesion. The main purpose of developing this CSVD burden score, as opposed to just using the WMH lesion volume and surface‐based morphometry volume estimates as indicators of the presence of CSVD, is to present data with potential clinical relevance that could be quickly deployed in the clinical setting or used in clinical trials for risk stratification or selection of participants. Furthermore, a total CSVD burden score is more likely to capture the combined impact of CSVD. WMH will be rated using the Fazekas scale (0–3), with periventricular WMH rated separately from deep WMH. Basal ganglia ePVS will be rated on a 0 to 4 scale using the Edinburgh criteria/method developed, validated, and popularized and described in Potter et al. 38 39 The visual rating of the severity of periventricular WMH or deep WMH using the Fazekas grading system (0–3) is scored as follows: for (a) deep WMH, 0=no lesions, 1=punctate foci, 2=beginning confluency of foci, 3=large confluent areas; and (b) periventricular WMH, 0=no lesions, 1=caps or thin line around the horns of the lateral ventricles, 2=smooth halo, 3=extension to WM. , 40 We will define extensive WMH if the deep WMH were scored 2 or 3, or periventricular WMH were scored 3. For the severity of ePVS in the basal ganglia we will use the following visual rating criteria, 0=none; 1=1 to 10 ePVS; 2=11 to 20, ePVS; 3=21 to 40 ePVS and 4=>40 ePVS, 41 which is based on the MRI slice with the highest number of ePVS in the basal ganglia. Figure 39 1 is an example of a T2‐weighted MRI scan from a participant, and it shows the presence of ePVS in the basal ganglia (partly contained in the ellipse). Lacunes and CMBs will be rated on a simple binary scale with a score of 1 each for presence of 1 or more lacunes or CMBs in the brain. To develop the CSVD burden score, we will give a score of 1 each for Fazekas WMH scale (deep or periventricular but using the one with the highest rating) of 2 or higher, as well as for basal ganglia ePVS grade of 2 (10 or more ePVSs) or higher. Thus, combining this with the binary rating of lacunes and CMBs, we will have an ordinal scale (score) for overall CSVD burden, with a range of 0 to 4. Then we will categorize this into none to moderate CSVD (a score of 0–2), or severe CSVD (a score of 3–4) burden, as described by Staals et al and other investigators. , 22 Plans are in place to analyze each component individually as well, while also including quantification of lesions and lacunar infarcts. We will use the ordinal scale in all analyses and complement our findings with quantification of GM volume using the Automated Brain Anatomy for Cohort Imaging (ABACI) and WMH lesion volume using Unidentified Bright Object detector. 26 Figure 1 MRI scans from our cohort showing evidence of cerebral small vessel disease. A , FLAIR sequence showing deep and periventricular white matter hyperintensity lesions. B , T2‐weighted sequence showing grade 4 basal ganglia enlarged perivascular spaces (partly contained in the ellipse). C , T2*gradient recalled echo sequence showing multiple cerebral microbleeds. MRI indicates magnetic resonance imaging. MRI Imaging Quality Control Our initial visual quality control (QC) will involve a review of all the raw T1, T2, and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, then rating and flagging images based on any of the 4 visual QC criteria and rating system proposed by Backhausen et al: (1) image sharpness, (2) ringing, (3) contrast‐to‐noise ratio (CNR) of subcortical structures, and (4) CNR of GM and WM. For each category, we will assign a score such that 0, 1, and 2 represent good, moderate, and bad quality, respectively. 42 Figure 42 2 is an example of raw T1 and FLAIR images in a participant who received the worst score for T1 as well as combined T1 and FLAIR. A look at the output image shows that despite this, there are no major failures in the tissue segmentation by SPM12 or in the surface‐ and volume‐based segmentations in Freesurfer, suggesting that poor image quality is not likely to have a significant impact on tissue segmentation and thereby affect results and conclusions from our study. Figure 2 Raw T1 and FLAIR images in a participant who received the worst score for T1 as well as combined T1 and FLAIR. FLAIR indicates fluid‐attenuated inversion recovery; GM, gray matter; and SPM, statistical parametric mapping. Post‐ABACI processing, we will randomly select and inspect individual QC images produced by our pipeline, with specific emphasis on those that were flagged or classified as being of bad quality during preprocessing QC. The QC images include (1) multiple axial slices of T1 image with contours of coregistered FLAIR image for checking FLAIR‐to‐T1 coregistration; (2) similar T1 image but with brain mask overlay to check the quality of brain mask; (3) T1 image warped to the cohort‐specific template space with contours of GM of the template for checking spatial normalization; (4) multiple axial, sagittal, and coronal slices of GM and WM segmented with SPM12, overlaid on FLAIR image to inspect the quality of tissue segmentation; and (5) the Jacobian modulated GM and WM overlaid on T1 image warped to the template space to check for any unusual deformation. Then, using a modified version of the ENIGMA Cortical QC scripts (package 2.0, April 2017), we will generate images and movies of multiple views of Freesurfer surface reconstructions and cortical and subcortical parcellations to spot any gross failures in surface reconstruction and use the ENIGMA Cortical Quality Control Guide to check for any problems at the regional level in the Desikan cortical parcellation of each participant in this random sample. Reprocessing and tweaking of the pipeline will be recommended if >15% of this selected sample shows significant reconstruction failures. Finally, we will compute QC metrics as part of the structural pipeline (ABACI) using the main segmentation output images, and compute tissue signal‐to‐noise (SNR) and CNR. Specifically, we will compute cost function values for FLAIR to T1 co‐registration, within‐tissue signal‐to‐noise ratio in GM and WM (defined as mean divided by SD of the intensity values within these tissues), and GM‐to‐WM or GM‐to‐cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) CNR (defined as the ratio of GM to WM or GM to CSF mean intensity values) for both T1 and FLAIR images, using SPM12‐based tissue segmentations. We will also use an approach similar to the UK Biobank's image derived phenotype QC protocol and compute inverse values for both signal‐to‐noise ratio and CNR with higher values of all QC metrics representing worse quality. These computed QC metrics will be available for use in sensitivity analysis, to explore their impact on the various volumetric parameters. We can also use them for future statistical adjustment of analyses in this and any other project that will be using these data. 43 Apolipoprotein E Genotyping Presence of APOE ε4, ε3, and ε2 or TREM2 (R47H, W191X, or L211P), our ADRD risk alleles, will be identified from direct Taqman genotyping. Genotyping will be performed using custom‐designed TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays in accordance with manufacturer protocols (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Allele detection and genotype calling will be performed using the ABI 7900HT and the Sequence Detection System software (Life Technologies). In addition to genotyping for APOE and TREM2 variants, ≈120 ancestry informative markers will be genotyped in the same individuals using the Sequenom MassARRAY system (Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA). This medium‐throughput genotyping platform uses Matrix‐Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time‐of‐Flight mass spectrometry as a tool for differentiating genotypes by detecting single base pair extension products at the variant site of interest. The iPLEX Gold assay is a genotyping method that uses the MassARRAY system for multiplexing up to 120 SNPs in a single reaction. Analysis of the iPLEX Gold product is performed using the SpectroREADER (Bruker Compact), which is a Matrix‐Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time‐of‐Flight mass spectrometry instrument that can analyze 2 SpectroCHIPs at a time. As mass spectra are collected from successive wells, the genotype‐calling component of the SpectroTYPER software uses stringent algorithms to filter out noise and assigns the genotype calls in real time. This software also contains an Oracle database that tracks the identity of each sample in the genotyping plates via integrated use of 1‐ and 2‐dimensional barcode readers. The database stores the individual identifiers, genotypes, and the spectra for future reference. Cognitive Outcomes/Measures Cognitive assessments are performed by trained assessors over the phone. The SIS was administered starting in 2003 and is administered annually; the additional cognitive assessments are administered biennially. The SIS is a brief screening measure of global cognitive function and the primary cognitive outcome, and WLL, delayed recall, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, AFT (semantic fluency), and LFT (phonemic fluency) will serve as secondary outcomes. 44 REGARDS captures depressive symptoms using the abbreviated 4‐item Center for Epidemiological Study Depression scale. These tests are robust (even when conducted over the phone) and evaluated several cognitive domains. 45 , 46 , 47 For instance, the SIS accessed global cognitive function, and the AFT and LFT assessed verbal fluency and executive function. Each test is scored as follows: SIS (0–6), WLL (0–30), delayed recall (0–10), AFT (number of animals named in 1 minute), and LFT (number of words beginning with the letter F named in 1 minute). These cognitive assessments have served as the basis for over 37 peer‐reviewed publications in the REGARDS. 48 To allow for comparison of the results from this study to those from other studies that might have used different tools or methods for cognitive assessment and to enable us to derive a measure for overall cognitive function (including all possible domains), each cognitive test score will be converted into Z ‐scores [( )/SD]. We will then take a summed average of the X − X ¯ Z ‐scores for all the cognitive tests conducted at each time point (specifically every 2 years because that is the interval for the other cognitive evaluations beside the SIS). This will allow us to test change in overall cognitive functioning. Note that we will also generate Z ‐scores for all the available time points for the SIS and use this for SIS specific/focused analyses. We will standardize the average Z ‐scores of the cognitive measures (including SIS) so that the primary (global cognitive measure) outcome's effects are in units of SDs. We will use all available cognitive assessment data for each participant and generate Z scores for everyone and for each time point of each assessment; this should allow us to evaluate overall as well as domain‐specific trajectory of cognitive decline. As stated earlier, available evidence suggests that CSVD predates development of ischemic stroke or TIA events and as such, this approach will enable us to demonstrate whether the burden of specific CSVD marker and/or overall CSVD is associated with a faster decline in cognitive function in the presence of a stroke or TIA and thus, identify a higher risk population for more targeted prevention strategies for cognitive decline. The cognitive data to be used will cover a total period of 10 years of follow‐up, divided into ≤4 years before the stroke or TIA event and up to 6 years after the stroke or TIA event. This will enable us to have 2 or more time points for analysis of pre‐ and post‐event cognitive trajectory. We will define cognitive impairment using a standard definition already implemented in the REGARDS study , 45 , 49 , 50 , 51 and using 52 Z score cutoffs. We will determine the prevalence (baseline) of cognitive impairment before the stroke or TIA using data from participants with at least 1 cognitive assessment based on the SIS within the last 4 years before the stroke or TIA event. Poststroke cognitive outcome/impairment will be based on cognitive assessments within the first 6 years after the stroke or TIA event. Sample Size Estimates Based on a preliminary analysis of the stroke and TIA cases in the REGARDS adjudication database as of 2018, our minimum sample size is 1810: this is the sample of cases with at least 1 cognitive assessment (SIS), MR images to be requested, and covariate data. It is anticipated that this number will increase by between 200 and 250 new stroke and 50 to 80 new TIA cases by the proposed completion date of this ancillary study, as more recent adjudication data become available. This sample size will make our study one of the largest ever proposed in this field and certainly the largest among NHB individuals. With about 48% NHB participants our race‐stratified analysis will have a sample size of 868 NHB and 942 NHW participants for examination of baseline cognition (see Figure 3 ). Furthermore, our smallest sample size for longitudinal examination of Black–White disparity in cognitive decline will be 889 total, 426 NHB participants and 463 NHW participants (Figure 3 ). Given the number of stroke/TIA cases, we estimated the power to detect a range of effect sizes for decline in cognitive function. , 22 , 26 , 36 Figure 37 4 is a plot of power against effect size (ranging from 0.01 to 0.15). The effect size for adjusted correlation between CSVD burden and global cognitive function reported from a similar study (among NHWs) was −0.178 with a sample size of 189 individuals. Our power estimate here is very conservative and accounts for multiple statistical tests and is based on our smallest possible sample size (889 total, with 426 NHB participants and 463 NHW participants). Our estimate shows that we will have at least 80% power to detect an effect size of 0.09 SD change in Z score (with correction for as many as 20 tests at P <0.0025) or 0.07 with correction for only 4 tests, assuming we adjust for as many as 20 , 11 covariates. The power estimate presented in the figure is for NHB participants (our smallest possible sample size), because we reasoned that with the number of NHB participants in REGARDS being slightly fewer than NHW particpants, then our analysis among NHW participants will have greater statistical power. Note that with the expected increase in the number of stroke/TIA cases, we will be able to detect an even smaller effect size. 53 Figure 3 Flow chart of the total sample of individuals in the parent REGARDS study as well as the number of participants available for our study. Also indicated is the sample size that will be used to support specific aims proposed in the study. BMI indicates body mass index; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; REGARDS, Reason for Geographic and and Racial Difference in Stroke; and TIA, transient ischemic attack. Figure 4 Plot of power against effect size (ranging from 0.01 to 0.15). The α error probability is the Bonferroni corrected P value with 0.0025=0.05/20 for instance, with the number 20 representing 20 possible tests. Covariates The covariates to consider and adjust for in analyses will be those factors that would potentially confound the results and thus conclusions of our study. It is noted that there could be some degree of collinearity between some of the covariates and the independent variables. We will test for collinearity and implement the appropriate statistical approach. The baseline covariate data to be requested from REGARDS includes age (at the time of stroke or TIA event and thus age at MRI scan), sex, race, education, marital status, household income, urban/rural residence, and region of residence (Stroke Belt versus non‐Stroke Belt). Other covariates are vascular risk factors such as systolic blood pressure or hypertension status, diabetes status, hyperlipidemia, atrial fibrillation, waist circumference, body mass index, alcohol intake, cigarette smoking, and physical activity. Finally, additional clinical covariates that are risk factors for cognitive impairment and could be potential confounders include baseline cognitive score for each cognitive outcome (to enable us to evaluate trajectory), glomerular filtration rate, history of myocardial infarction, self‐reported health status, depressive symptoms and, if available, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score at admission (as an index of stroke severity). If necessary, we will also adjust our analysis for MRI scan quality using the relevant and appropriate quantitative QC metrics computed in the image QC section. These health and demographic covariates were collected as part of the baseline assessment performed in the parent REGARDS study. Statistical Analysis In the first aim, we will perform univariate comparison of CSVD burden obtained from the visual rating, cortical and subcortical GM, and global and regional WMH lesion volume by race (NHB versus NHW). We will also perform univariate comparison of covariates. Next, we will use multivariable logistic regression model to determine the association between race and CSVD burden, cortical and subcortical GM volume, and global and regional WMH lesion volume. We will stratify our analysis by sex in order to uncover if present, the role of sex as a biological variable. We will also test for interactions between our exposures and sex to identify whether there is interaction with sex and whether that could explain any observed impact of sex as a biological variable in our analysis and results. Also, all multivariable analyses will be adjusted for covariates known to be related to the independent variable based on previous literature and the known comorbidities for VCID/ADRD. We expect a significantly higher burden of CSVD among NHB compared with NHW individuals. Finally, we expect the logistic regression model to show a significant association between burden of CSVD and NHB race as well as being from the stroke belt. For the second aim we will perform a univariate comparison of the distribution of vascular and ADRD genetic risk variants for the APOE ε4 and TREM2 variants by race and sex. For TREM2 , we will also examine the allele frequency by race. Next, we will examine whether the distribution of CSVD burden differs based on the presence of the different risk alleles, stratified by race (NHB versus NHW). We will use multivariable logistic regression to evaluate whether the presence of the different risk alleles for each of the ADRD genes is associated with a dichotomized CSVD burden (none to moderate versus severe). Using multivariable linear regression, we will examine whether presence of these ADRD risk gene variants or vascular risk factors is associated with lower cortical and subcortical GM volumes or larger global or regional WMH lesion volumes. If interaction tests suggest effect modification by sex, our analysis will be stratified by sex to explore any sex differences. All multivariable analyses with genetic data will be adjusted for covariates known to be related to the independent variable based on previous literature including ancestry, using principal components analysis of global genetic ancestry as we have done before. , 54 Finally, we will apply mediation analysis to determine whether the ADRD genetic or vascular risk factors partially or completely mediate the relationship between race and burden or severity of CSVD components or burden and Black–White disparity in CSVD. This approach should also enable us to isolate the portion of the observed Black–White disparity that is accounted for by the presence of the ADRD genetic or vascular risk factor(s). 55 Lastly, the third aim analysis for prevalence and trajectory of VCID will include the time periods before and after the stroke/TIA event. The SIS will be treated as a measure of global cognitive function and the primary outcome in terms of measure of cognition and secondary outcomes will be WLL, delayed recall, abbreviated Montreal Cognitive Assessment score (memory, orientation), and the verbal fluency/executive function measures of LFT and AFT. Each cognitive outcome measure will be treated as a continuous variable after conversion to Z scores; this will allow us to be able to detect direct individual change as well as intraindividual variability in changes in cognitive function. We will use the t test and chi‐square test for univariate comparison of participants' characteristics as well as cognitive outcome variables. For the association of total CSVD burden score as well as individual CSVD marker burden with prevalence of cognitive decline at baseline and trajectory of cognitive decline over time, we will use a linear mixed‐effect model. For decline in cognitive function, we will adjust the analysis for baseline level of cognitive function in addition to other relevant covariates. We will include random effects for intercept and slope in our model to account for possible correlation between cognitive measures within the same individual at each time point. A time covariate will be expressed as time from first cognitive evaluation/measure to time of last. Because individuals had stroke or TIA at different times, we also include stroke or TIA as a time‐varying covariate, that is 0 then 1 for stroke or TIA and 0, then 1, then 1 again for those who have a stroke after a TIA. We will use independent probability of attrition weighting to account for loss to follow‐up (for any reason) of participants, for the longitudinal analysis. All analyses will be stratified by race. We will also perform a sex‐stratified analysis to explore the role of sex as a biological variable. Data Sharing The data for this study are not available for sharing; that is, data sharing is not directly applicable to this specific article because it is a protocol paper. However, the data from the study described will be made available following the National Institutes of Health and the REGARDS study guidelines. Discussion The overall goals of this study are to determine (1) whether there is a Black–White difference in the prevalence and burden of CSVD among REGARDS study participants with a stroke or TIA, (2) the potential role of vascular and genetic risk factors in the overall burden or Black–White differences in the prevalence of CSVD, and (3) the contribution of CSVD and genetic risk factors to Black–White disparity in the prevalence and trajectory of VCID among REGARDS study participants with a stroke or TIA. Individuals with stroke or TIA often have the highest burden of vascular risk factors and are at a higher risk of VCID, and as such, this study will provide critical data to enable the identification of a high‐risk population for more targeted VCID prevention or treatment strategies that could reduce the Black–White disparity in cognitive impairment and dementia. Among the many strengths of this study is leveraging the robust and diverse REGARDS parent study, allowing this project to be well positioned to determine the role of genetics, vascular risk factors, and CSVD pathology in Black–White disparity in the prevalence and trajectory of VCID. The REGARDS cohort data will allow for at least 868 NHB and 942 NHW participants. This will provide ample power to detect even small effect sizes while being able to correct for either a high number of tests or as many as 20 covariates, thus, enabling us to draw conclusions that are applicable to a variety of real‐world individuals who suffer a stroke or TIA. Some potential limitations of this study include potential for sampling bias because we will include only individuals who have MRI images and is restricted to individuals who have had a stroke or TIA. It is not representative of the general population. However, future studies without this restriction can use existing collaboration with the Jackson Heart Study or the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study, both of which have centralized MRI and were not restricted to stroke or TIA cases. As this study progresses, more advanced MRI techniques may become available. This study is well positioned to incorporate these MRI advances because the ABACI and Unidentified Bright Object detector pipeline are designed to accommodate and adjust for differences in image quality that arise from different technologies or acquired by different medical facilities. Also, the parent study REGARDS is ongoing, allowing for continued retrieval of images in the future. There are also limitations associated with visual rating of MRI scans and the associated subjective nature. However, preliminary data indicate good inter‐ and intrarater reliability between the raters and across quality of MRI scans, thus showing the robustness of our approach. Additionally, this project compliments visual rating of MRI scans with a quantitative approach (ABACI and Unidentified Bright Object detector) that will increase reproducibility and provide corroboration of findings from the visual rating. Lastly, there may be issues arising from quantitative GM and WMH lesion volume estimation. However, because the image QC and image automated image analysis will proceed in parallel, the necessary adjustments can be made in real time if visualization of our QC data show significant (>5% total) increase in the number of outliers (no >10% total). Sources of Funding This study is supported in part by National Institutes of Health grant R01AG072592. The parent REGARDS study is supported by cooperative agreement U01NS041588 cofunded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health and Human Services. Disclosures Dr Bradford Burke Worrall is an Associate Editor and Deputy Editor for Editorial Education for the journal Neurology . The remaining authors have no disclosures to report.