1 BACKGROUND Females are disproportionately affected by Alzheimer's disease (AD), with studies showing their lifetime risk is nearly double that of males. , 1 Although only a small proportion of randomized controlled trials have reported results stratified by sex, 2 potential disparities favoring males have been observed in the clinical efficacy of newly approved anti‐amyloid therapies. 3 , 4 , 5 A growing body of literature has explored sex differences in the underlying pathophysiology of AD; however, the evidence is still unclear on whether sex‐specific biological factors, gender‐specific sociocultural influences, or a combination of both contribute to sex disparities in AD risk and outcomes. 6 , 4 , 5 , 6 7 Previous studies on sex differences in amyloid pathology through post mortem human studies and neuroimaging in individuals with cognitive impairment have yielded contrasting results. Several neuropathological studies revealed a greater burden of AD neuropathology in females than males. These findings have been more consistently reported for neurofibrillary tangles than neuritic amyloid plaques. , 8 Examining sex differences in amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) positivity rates and severity of amyloid burden in several clinical AD cohorts yielded inconsistent results. 9 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 Some studies showed higher global amyloid load 18 , 17 , 18 or visual read positivity rates in females, 19 while others found no sex effects on amyloid global load 10 , 13 , 14 or amyloid positivity rates. 15 , 11 , 12 Higher amyloid PET burden in males with dementia has also been rarely reported. 16 , 20 These conflicting findings may be attributed to variations in study design, sample characteristics, image processing methods, and use of different analysis methods. 21 In this study, we aimed to investigate sex differences in amyloid PET in the Imaging Dementia–Evidence for Amyloid Scanning (IDEAS) Study, a large, real‐world study on the clinical utility of amyloid PET in Medicare beneficiaries with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia of uncertain cause. , 22 To robustly interrogate sex differences in amyloid PET, we defined amyloid PET positivity according to two independent methods: (1) based on a local clinical visual read by a radiologist or nuclear medicine physician and (2) based on amyloid PET quantification using an a priori–defined quantitative threshold. Furthermore, we examined differences in global amyloid PET uptake as a continuous variable measured using the Centiloid (CL) method. We further examined how the relationships between sex and amyloid burden are modified by age, race/ethnicity, and level of cognitive impairment. We hypothesized that females would have higher rates of amyloid positivity and overall greater amyloid burden than males after accounting for additional demographic and clinical variables. Our overall objective was to shed light on the relationships between sex and amyloid to advance our understanding of AD pathophysiology, improve clinical care, and inform implementation of novel amyloid‐targeting therapies. 23 2 METHODS 2.1 Overview The IDEAS study , 22 was a prospective, single‐arm longitudinal study evaluating the associations among amyloid PET, changes in patient management, and patient‐centered outcomes in Medicare beneficiaries with MCI or dementia meeting published Appropriate Use Criteria for amyloid PET. 23 In this practice‐based, pragmatic study, 946 dementia specialists from 595 practices recruited and referred Medicare beneficiaries for amyloid PET at 343 imaging facilities across the United States. The study design and primary outcomes have been published previously. 24 , 22 23 2.2 Study design 2.2.1 Participants The IDEAS study included 18,295 Medicare beneficiaries ≥ 65 years diagnosed with MCI or dementia. Sex was registered by a dementia specialist at the time of enrollment. Patients were not asked about gender identity. Eligibility criteria and definitions of other demographic characteristics (e.g., race, ethnicity, and education) and clinical variables have been previously published; 24 , 10 see 23 Supplementary Methods in supporting information for details. 2.2.2 Amyloid PET imaging Participants underwent amyloid PET with one of the three US Food and Drug Administration–approved radiotracers— 18 F‐florbetapir, 18 F‐florbetaben, or 18 F‐flutemetamol—at 343 imaging facilities between February 2016 and January 2018. PET scans were uploaded to an image repository, though participants and clinical sites could choose to “opt out” of sharing their PET scans. Out of the 18,295 acquired scans, sites uploaded 10,774 reconstructed amyloid PET scans to the central image repository, along with the visual interpretation of these scans (positive or negative) by local radiologists or nuclear medicine physicians. The 10,774 reconstructed PET scans were preprocessed and warped to the Montreal Neurological Institute template space using a previously validated PET‐only pipeline. Each processed scan was individually quality controlled by at least two raters, and 10,361 scans were retained for analysis. Three hundred four scans were excluded due to file or reconstruction issues (e.g., corrupted data, incomplete attenuation correction). An additional 59 scans failed quality control because of major bilateral lesions (infarcts or severe ventriculomegaly) or insufficient field of view, and another 50 scans were excluded due to pipeline failure in warping the images to template space. 25 CL values reflecting global amyloid PET burden (with 0 CL anchored at the average PET uptake in young cognitively unimpaired controls and 100 anchored at the average in a group of patients with mild–moderate AD dementia) were calculated for these 10,361 scans using separate conversion equations for each tracer. 26 A predefined threshold of 24.4 CLs was used to determine quantitative amyloid positivity, as defined in a multisite PET‐to‐autopsy study. 25 27 RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review : The authors reviewed existing literature on sex differences in amyloid pathology in Alzheimer's disease (AD), as measured by positron emission tomography (PET) or at autopsy. Previous studies, particularly those examining amyloid PET across different sexes, have yielded inconsistent results, with few large, diverse cohorts. Interpretation : In this large, clinic‐based, multi‐site study of participants seeking specialty care for cognitive decline, females exhibited higher rates of amyloid PET positivity and higher amyloid burden compared to males at both the MCI and dementia stages. Sex differences were further influenced by age and race, with younger females showing higher amyloid burden than their male counterparts and Black females exhibiting higher amyloid burden than Black males. These findings underscore that sex significantly influences amyloid pathology and highlight the need for sex‐stratified analyses that also consider sociocultural factors in future AD research. Future directions : Our findings foster a call to action for implementing sex‐based analyses in future AD research and further exploring the mechanisms by which sex and gender identity interact with other biological and social factors to moderate the risk of disease. 2.3 Statistical analyses We compared sociodemographic and clinical variables by sex using analysis of variance for continuous variables and the χ 2 test for categorical variables. Global amyloid burden was not normally distributed and showed a bimodal distribution, similar to previous studies. Logarithmic transformation did not approximate a normal distribution. For continuous non‐parametric variables, Mann–Whitney 26 U /Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare males and females. The associations between sex and amyloid PET were investigated using hierarchical binomial logistic regression for binary outcomes (visual read or amyloid PET positivity based on dichotomized quantification) or multivariate linear regression for continuous outcomes (amyloid burden in CL). The relationship between amyloid load and sex was modeled using three nested models: Model 1, without covariates; Model 2, adjusting for demographics (age, race, ethnicity, education, and Mini‐Mental State Examination [MMSE]); and Model 3, additionally adjusting for the presence of clinical risk factors (family history of AD, past traumatic brain injury [TBI], depression, kidney disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], vascular risk factors [diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, tobacco use, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, ischemic heart disease, acute myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular attack [CVA]/transient ischemic attack [TIA]]). Odds ratios (ORs) with 95% Wald confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated for each model to measure an association between amyloid positivity and sex. In all models, the male sex was used as the reference group. For sensitivity analyses, all models were re‐run in a subset of participants with positive amyloid PET visual reads and split by MCI and dementia subgroups. As a complementary sensitivity analysis to the covariate‐adjusted models in our primary analyses, we explored differences in amyloid PET measures in identically matched male and female groups using 1:1 matching on age, education level, cognitive‐impairment status, and race (see Supplementary Methods for details). For exploratory purposes, we examined the association between various demographics and comorbidities and PET scan visual read positivity. Further, we assessed the influence of these factors on the relationship between sex and amyloid PET status. For this, we constructed binomial logistic regression with amyloid PET visual read status as an outcome and all demographic and clinical factors as predictors separately for males and females. To assess the modulation effects, an interaction term between sex and one of the predictors from Model 3 was iteratively added to Model 4 run on the whole cohort. Finally, we fit a general linear model to explore the effect of sex on the association between amyloid burden and modified MMSE score. Modified MMSE included either raw MMSE score for patients who had it or Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) converted to MMSE using the equation from Bergeron et al. if only MoCA was available. Models were adjusted for sex, age, race, ethnicity, education, cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) and memantine treatment, other risk factors, and comorbidities mentioned in previous analyses. 28 All statistical analyses were performed using jamovi version 2.3 (The jamovi Project). A two‐sided significance level of 0.05 was used to determine statistical significance. Model diagnostics were conducted for all linear and binomial regressions (as described in 29 Supplementary Methods ). Given the exploratory nature of the analysis, we did not adjust for multiple comparisons. Python 3.9 was used to generate the figures. 30 2.4 Data availability All IDEAS data presented in this article (clinical, demographic, and imaging variables, including CL values) are publicly available through the Global Alzheimer's Association Interactive Network ( https://www.gaaindata.org/partner/IDEAS ). Raw and processed PET images are available through the Image and Data Archive of the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging ( https://ida.loni.usc.edu ). 3 RESULTS 3.1 Sex differences in demographic, clinical, and risk factors profile Among the 10,361 participants, 51% were female. Demographics and clinical characteristics are presented in Table 1 . Females were slightly younger than males (75 vs. 76 years, p < 0.001). Most participants identified as White, non‐Hispanic. Education attainment was significantly higher in males than females, with 55% of males having bachelor's or higher degrees compared to 33% of females. TABLE 1 Participant demographics and clinical characteristics stratified by sex. Total Male Female Characteristic N (%) 10,361 5116 (49%) 5245 (51%) p ‐value Demographics Age, median (Q1, Q3) 10,361 76 (71, 80) 75 (70, 80) 0.008 Race 9631 <0.001 White 4561 (95.5%) 4566 (94.0%) Black 124 (2.6%) 192 (4.0%) Asian 89 (1.9%) 99 (2.0%) Ethnicity 9602 <0.001 Hispanic or Latino 174 (3.7%) 275 (5.7%) Not Hispanic or Latino 4580 (96.3%) 4573 (94.3%) Education 10,361 <0.001 <High school 258 (5.0%) 438 (8.4%) High school or equivalent 954 (18.6%) 1667 (31.8%) Some college or associate degree 1099 (21.5%) 1393 (26.6%) Bachelor's degree 1379 (27.0%) 1036 (19.8%) Master's degree or higher 1426 (27.9%) 711 (13.6%) Clinical characteristics Impairment level 10,361 <0.001 MCI 3316 (64.8%) 3184 (60.7%) Dementia 1800 (35.2%) 2061 (39.3%) MCI type 6499 0.009 Amnestic MCI 2643 (79.7%) 2619 (82.3%) Non‐amnestic MCI 672 (20.3%) 565 (17.7%) * MMSE score 10,333 26 (23, 28) 26 (22, 28) <0.001 Prior ChEI treatment 10,361 1935 (37.8%) 1837 (35.0%) 0.003 Prior memantine treatment 10,361 1023 (20.0%) 973 (18.6%) 0.062 Note : Continuous variables are presented as median (1st quartile, 3rd quartile) and compared using Mann–Whitney U /Wilcoxon tests. Categorical variables are shown as counts (% of available data) and compared using chi‐squared tests. p values represent the statistical significance of differences between sex groups. Abbreviations: ChEI, cholinesterase inhibitors; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination. * Includes converted MoCA scores to MMSE scores. 28 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. MCI was more frequent than dementia in both sexes. However, compared to males, females had slightly higher rates of dementia (39.3% vs. 35.2%, p < 0.001) and amnestic MCI (82.3% vs. 79.7%, p = 0.009), while non‐amnestic MCI was more common among males. A greater proportion of males had received ChEI and memantine treatment compared to females (Table 1 ). Rates of some dementia risk factors (TBI, congestive heart failure, ischemic heart disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, stroke/TIA, tobacco use, and kidney disease) were significantly higher in males than females, whereas females had significantly higher rates of history of depression (20% in females vs. 13% in males, p < 0.001) and slightly higher rates of AD family history (13% in females vs. 11% in males, p < 0.001; Table S1 in supporting information). 3.2 Sex differences in amyloid PET measures 3.2.1 Sex differences in amyloid PET positivity proportions and ORs Females had higher rates of positive amyloid PET visual reads compared to males (63.3% [95% CI: 62.0%–64.6%] vs. 59.0% [95% CI: 57.7%–60.3%], respectively, p < 0.001). When evaluated based on a predefined quantitative cutoff (CL ≥24.4), females had a higher frequency of amyloid PET positivity compared to males (62.9% [95% CI: 61.7%–64.1%] vs. 55.3% [95% CI: 54.0%–56.7%], respectively, p < 0.001). When further stratifying by the degree of cognitive impairment, females had higher amyloid burden and higher rates of amyloid PET positivity than males in both MCI and dementia subgroups (Figure 1A and Table S2 in supporting information). FIGURE 1 Sex differences in amyloid PET scan positivity rates and amyloid burden (Centiloids) stratified by cognitive impairment level. A, Percentage of positive amyloid PET scans based on visual reads and binarized amyloid PET quantitation (Centiloid ≥ 24.4) in the entire cohort, as well as in the MCI and dementia subgroups. B, Distribution of Centiloid values comparing males and females across the entire cohort and within the MCI and dementia subgroups. Statistical analyses included Mann–Whitney U /Wilcoxon tests for medians and chi‐squared tests for categorical variables. Females showed significantly higher Centiloid levels and amyloid PET positivity compared to males, irrespective of impairment severity. All comparisons were statistically significant ( p < 0.05) and are detailed in Table S2 in supporting information. CL, Centiloid; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PET, positron emission tomography. When assessed by logistic regression, females had a higher likelihood of amyloid PET positivity compared to males. As shown in Table 2 , the OR for visual read was 1.20 (95% CI: 1.11–1.31, p < 0.001; A, model 1), and the OR for quantification‐based positivity was 1.37 (95% CI: 1.26–1.49, p < 0.001; B, model 1). These differences remained significant after adjusting for demographic factors (Table 2A,B ; model 2). After further adjustment for clinical characteristics and dementia risk factors (Table 2A,B ; model 3), females consistently exhibited a higher OR for amyloid PET positivity both according to visual read 1.18 (95% CI: 1.08–1.30, p < 0.001) and dichotomized amyloid PET quantification 1.39 (95% CI: 1.27–1.52, p < 0.001). TABLE 2 Sex effects on both likelihood of amyloid PET positivity and global amyloid burden (CL). Sex (Female–Male) * ORs/ Estimates Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 N N N Binary outcomes: Amyloid PET positivity OR (95% CI) p ‐value OR (95% CI) p ‐value OR (95% CI) p ‐value A. Based on visual reads 9266 9266 9266 1.20 (1.11–1.31) <0.001 1.23 (1.12–1.34) <0.001 1.18 (1.08–1.30) <0.001 B. Based on CL ≥ 24.4 9272 9272 9272 1.37 (1.26–1.49) <0.001 1.42 (1.30–1.55) <0.001 1.39 (1.27–1.52) <0.001 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Continuous outcomes: Global amyloid burden (Centiloids) N N N Estimate (95% CI) p ‐value Estimate (95% CI) p ‐value Estimate (95% CI) p ‐value C. Including all scans 10,361 9272 9272 4.88 (2.89–6.88) <0.001 5.91 (3.88–7.95) <0.001 5.60 (3.51–7.69) <0.001 D. In a subgroup with positive visual reads 5722 5722 5722 2.08 (−0.02–4.18) 0.052 3.03 (088–5.19) 0.006 3.37 (1.15–5.59) 0.006 Note : Results from binomial regression and multivariable linear analyses assessing sex differences in (A and B) amyloid PET positivity (binary outcome) and (C and D) amyloid burden (measured in Centiloids, continuous outcome). ORs for sex from the binomial regression analysis and adjusted estimates for sex from the multivariable linear analysis are presented, with 95% CIs and p ‐values. Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; CIs, confidence intervals; CL, Centiloids; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination; N , number of individuals included in each model; ORs, odds ratios; PET, positron emission tomography; TBI, traumatic brain injury. * Male is used as the reference group. Model 1: Outcome ∼ sex. Model 2: Outcome ∼ sex + age + race + ethnicity + education + MMSE score. Model 3: Outcome ∼ sex + age + race + ethnicity + education + MMSE score + cardiovascular risk factors + depression + kidney disease + TBI + family history of AD. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 3.2.2 Sex differences in CL values Females also had a higher global amyloid burden when expressed in CLs, median (interquartile range [IQR]; 48.7 [2.3–85.4]) versus males (36.8 [−1.1–83.1], p < 0.001). When further stratified by the degree of cognitive impairment, females consistently showed higher CL values regardless of disease stage (Figure 1B and Table S2 ). In multivariable linear regression models, CL value was analyzed as a continuous variable (Table 2C,D ). Females demonstrated higher CLs compared to males (model 1), with even greater differences observed after adjusting for demographic factors (model 2) and dementia risk factors (model 3), all p < 0.05. 3.2.3 Sensitivity analyses These findings remained significant when the analyses were conducted separately for MCI and dementia subgroups; see Table S3A,S3B in supporting information. As a separate sensitivity analysis, we also evaluated 3533 male–female pairs matched 1:1 on age, race, education, and cognitive impairment status; females exhibited higher amyloid positivity rates—by both visual reads and the quantitative threshold of 24.4—and also higher CL values compared to males (Table S4 in supporting information). 3.3 Heterogeneity of effects: modifiers of sex differences in amyloid PET measures 3.3.1 Amyloid PET visual read positivity Given the difference in demographic and comorbidity profiles in males and females, we further explored how those factors modulate the effect of sex on amyloid PET positivity in the whole cohort. Detailed results of binomial regression analyses, including separate analyses for males and females and interaction effects between sex and each factor, are shown in Figure S1 and Table S5 in supporting information. Higher age, lower MMSE scores, White race, higher education, and family history of AD were associated with higher odds of amyloid‐positive visual reads in both males and females. There was a statistically significant interaction “Sex x Family history of AD” ( p = 0.043), with a greater effect observed in males (Table S5 ). Additionally, exploratory analyses revealed potential sex‐specific interactions with atrial fibrillation, acute myocardial infarction, and COPD (all p < 0.05). Although these interactions were not central to our primary hypotheses, full model results are provided in Table S5 to ensure transparency and to inform future hypothesis‐driven investigations. 3.3.2 Global amyloid burden measured by CL To further evaluate the modulatory effect of demographic factors on sex differences in amyloid burden among patients on the AD pathway, we focused on the group with positive visual reads. Sex moderated the effect of age on CLs (Figure 2A ); younger females showed the highest amyloid burden compared to older females or males (Sex × Age, p = 0.048; see Figure 2B ). Further, there was an interaction between sex and race. Black females had a significantly higher amyloid burden compared to Black males (Sex × Black race, p = 0.026), as shown in Figure 2C,D . FIGURE 2 Distribution of amyloid burden (CL) and age (A), stratified age (B), and race (C, D) stratified by sex in a subgroup of individuals with visually‐read positive scans. We used a series of linear models adjusting for demographic variables, impairment level, and risk factors, as well as the interaction of sex with each demographic factor separately. Shown are the adjusted estimates (β) and the 95% CI for each interaction term included; (C) shows the distribution of amyloid burden stratified by race and sex. Boxplots show medians, IQRs, and individual data points. Median (IQR) values and p values from Wilcoxon rank‐sum tests comparing sexes within each racial group are detailed in Table S7 in supporting information. Male is the reference for the sex group, and White is the reference in the race group. Asterisk (*) denotes significant sex differences within a group ( p < 0.05). CI, confidence interval; CL, Centiloid; IQR, interquartile range; y, years To better understand the observed differences, we performed a supplementary subanalysis of demographic and risk factors by sex and race groups (Tables S6 and S7 in supporting information), which revealed significant differences that likely contribute to the disparities observed in our primary analysis. We found that Black males, compared to White males, had significantly lower education; a higher rate of dementia; a higher proportion of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes; and lower CLs. Compared to Black males, Black females were younger, showed no differences in education or cognitive impairment severity, but still showed significantly higher CL values. Black males had higher rates of tobacco use, TBI, COPD, and ischemic heart disease than Black females. No differences were shown in other risk factors. 3.4 Sex did not modulate the effect of amyloid burden on cognitive outcome Using general linear models with MMSE scores as the outcome, we found that in both males and females, higher CLs correlated with lower cognitive performance. These models were adjusted for age, sex, education, race, ethnicity, treatment with ChEIs or memantine, vascular risk factors, and other comorbidities. The interaction between sex and CLs did not reach statistical significance in correlations with MMSE ( p = 0.055; Figure 3 ). FIGURE 3 Sex differences in cognitive performance as a function of Centiloids. Scatter plot for MMSE scores as a function of amyloid burden (CL) in the entire cohort stratified by sex and a corresponding linear regression line and distribution for each of the variables. Reported adjusted estimates and p values were derived from a general linear model: Modified MMSE score ∼ sex + age + education + race + ethnicity + treatment with ChEI + treatment with memantine + amyloid burden (CL) + risk factors and comorbidities (as in previous models) + sex x amyloid burden (CL). A higher level of education was associated with higher MMSE scores ( p < 0.001). Considering the lower level of education among females in our cohort, we examined interaction effects of “Sex x Education,” which was not found to be significant ( p = 0.366). ChEI, cholinesterase inhibitor; CL, Centiloid; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination. 4 DISCUSSION Our analysis of a large, real‐world, memory clinic–based cohort of Medicare beneficiaries presenting with MCI or dementia revealed that females had significantly higher proportions and odds of amyloid PET positivity, along with a greater global amyloid burden (CL) compared to males, irrespective of cognitive impairment severity. In participants with amyloid PET–positive visual reads, sex differences were more pronounced in those of younger age and in Black individuals. This research enhances our understanding of sex differences related to amyloid pathology, highlighting both biological and sociocultural factors specific to females and addressing the inconsistencies noted in prior studies. Previous research has shown mixed results, , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 with some studies suggesting a predisposition for greater amyloid accumulation in females, 18 , 9 , 17 while others found no significant sex differences. 18 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 These inconsistencies likely stem from variations in study methodologies, sample populations, and demographic factors. Our large, real‐world study of memory care across the United States builds on these observations by precisely quantifying the global amyloid burden measured by PET, providing an in vivo measure of amyloid pathology, and applying predefined pathological thresholds to classify scans as amyloid positive or negative. Consistently, females exhibited higher amyloid positivity rates based on both visual reads and quantitative thresholds, as well as a significantly higher global amyloid burden (CL). These effects were slightly more pronounced when applying a quantitative threshold versus a visual read to classify amyloid positivity. It is possible that quantitative methods may be more sensitive than visual reads for early amyloid pathology, potentially explaining these subtle differences in our findings. 16 The robustness of our findings across multiple amyloid PET metrics strengthens the reliability of our conclusions and supports the hypothesis that in the context of cognitive impairment, females are more prone to amyloid plaque accumulation. Sex‐specific factors, including demographic, lifestyle, and genetic factors, as well as other comorbidities such as cardiovascular conditions, 31 metabolic disorders, 32 and hormonal variations 33 may potentially contribute to the distinct susceptibility to pathophysiological processes underlying cognitive decline between males and females with AD pathology. 34 35 In our study, females, despite being slightly younger and having fewer medical and vascular risk factors, demonstrated higher rates of amnestic MCI and dementia compared to males. This may align with the higher amyloid PET positivity and CLs seen in females in our cohort and is consistent with the broader epidemiological data, which also suggested higher rates of dementia in females, more rapid cognitive decline and hippocampal atrophy in females with AD pathology, 36 and a faster progression from MCI to dementia. 2 Sex‐related diagnostic biases may also play a role. Specifically, women tend to perform better than men on verbal memory tasks, which are heavily relied upon in clinical screening for MCI and dementia. This advantage may mask early cognitive decline, potentially delaying diagnosis and contributing to a higher burden of disease by the time impairment is clinically recognized. 37 This could partially explain the higher amyloid PET positivity observed among females in our cohort at study enrollment. 38 Another contributing factor to these findings may be the observed education disparities, as females in our cohort had lower education attainment than males. This likely reflects historical socio‐cultural factors and structural sexism, especially in females from historically marginalized‐groups, limiting women's access to education, employment, and health care and potentially influencing their cognitive resilience and health‐seeking behaviors. , 39 However, sex and education did not modify the effect of amyloid burden on cognitive performance, suggesting that the clinical manifestation of amyloid deposition is similar by sex and regardless of educational attainment. Of note, although females were more likely to have amnestic MCI or dementia, they were less likely to be treated with ChEIs, even though ChEIs have been reported to show more favorable effects in women. Similar disparities in prescribing ChEIs were also shown in previous studies; however, systematic data regarding sex‐specific differences in tolerability and adherence to treatment remain limited. 40 Women in our cohort had higher rates of depression compared to males. While we do not have enough data on psychotropic treatment, some studies have shown that women with AD are more likely to be prescribed psychotropic medications, 41 which might complicate the introduction of ChEIs due to potential drug–drug interactions or concerns about side effects. 42 In participants with amyloid‐positive visual reads, we observed that females in their early 70s to 80s tend to have a higher amyloid burden compared to males in the same age group; however, this difference diminishes with advancing age. This age‐related sex effect might be linked to hormonal changes, particularly the rapid decline in estrogen during menopause, which could increase females’ susceptibility to amyloid‐related pathology. , 43 Several studies also suggest that the risk associated with the apolipoprotein E ( 44 APOE ) ε4 genotype is age dependent, with younger female carriers showing higher AD risk and amyloid deposition, 45 while older male carriers exhibit increased amyloid levels. 20 Although our cross‐sectional study did not account for hormone levels, menopause timing, or 20 APOE ε4 genotype, our findings suggest that younger age may be a critical period for amyloid accumulation and dementia risk in females. Our study also uncovered potential intersectional racial and sex disparities in amyloid burden. As reported before in IDEAS, Wilkins et al. showed that White individuals, regardless of sex, had higher OR of amyloid positivity compared to Asian and Black individuals. Focusing on the subset of individuals with positive visual amyloid PET reads, we found a sex‐by‐race interaction, with greater sex differences in amyloid burden found in Black participants compared to those self‐identifying as White or Asian. Previous studies have reported a higher risk of clinically diagnosed dementia in both females and minoritized communities. 10 , 46 When evaluated separately, most studies have reported a higher burden of AD neuropathology (as measured with biomarkers or 47 post mortem ) in females and lower rates of AD neuropathology and higher vascular pathology burden in Black Americans. , 48 However, there has been limited research on the intersectional effect of sex and race on amyloid burden, with mixed results reported in the literature. 49 Our findings support the hypothesis that Black females bear a higher amyloid burden compared to Black males. These intersectional disparities in Black females might be driven by intersecting environmental and lifestyle factors such as socioeconomic disparities, health‐care access, higher rates of hypertension and diabetes, and chronic stress, attenuated genetic risk like 50 APOE ε4 may further exacerbate this burden in Black females. , 48 , 49 We found higher rates of vascular risk factors and lower education in Black males compared to White males and a distinct risk factor profile in Black males compared to Black females. Altogether, those findings emphasize the role of vascular pathology and social determinants of health in cognitive impairment in Black males and may partially explain the observed sex differences in amyloid burden within the Black cohort and the differences between Black males and White males. 50 The implications of our study findings are of potential clinical relevance in the context of recently approved disease‐modifying therapies. Recent clinical trials investigating anti‐amyloid therapies, such as aducanumab, lecanemab, and donanemab, have shown smaller clinical responses in females, suggesting potential sex‐related differences in drug efficacy or amyloid clearance mechanisms. , 4 , 5 Based on our data, potential explanations may include a more advanced clinical stage, higher baseline amyloid burden at treatment initiation, and longer time to amyloid clearance in females than in males. Greater amyloid deposition may also impact downstream processes, such as tau deposition 6 , 17 , 51 , 52 and neuroinflammation. 53 , 54 Indeed, multiple studies have demonstrated a greater tau burden in females based on PET and neuropathology. 55 , 17 , 18 In turn, a higher tau burden is associated with a smaller clinical benefit in response to plaque‐lowering drugs. 52 6 Altogether, these findings underscore the need for sex‐specific strategies to optimize therapeutic outcomes in females. Early diagnosis and intervention may be particularly critical, as well as extending treatment duration to ensure sustained amyloid clearance and mitigate downstream tau pathology and neuroinflammation. Future research should focus on sex differences in treatment responses to amyloid beta–targeting antibodies and other emerging therapeutic targets in AD. 4.1 Strengths and limitations of the study A major strength of our study is the real‐world clinical setting, which enhances the generalizability of our findings. The large sample size provided adequate power to identify more subtle sex effects and to explore modulating effects and interactions with age, race/ethnicity, and cognitive stage on the relationships between sex and amyloid burden. Further, the integration of amyloid PET visual reads and quantification provides a comprehensive assessment of in vivo amyloid pathology. Our study also has some limitations. Being cross‐sectional in nature, it does not allow us to establish causality between the identified factors and amyloid pathology, highlighting the need for longitudinal studies to explore causal relationships. The study population was limited to IDEAS participants who contributed to the image repository, which may have introduced selection bias. Also, as the study included only cognitively impaired individuals, the findings on sex differences in amyloid PET measures may not be generalizable to earlier (i.e., preclinical) stages of the AD continuum. Sex was defined solely based on physician‐reported data, without consideration of gender identity. This approach does not capture the nuanced sociocultural and psychosocial dimensions of gender that may influence biological and clinical outcomes. Additionally, our findings could be influenced by unmeasured confounders, such as APOE ε4 genotype, hormone levels, and body mass index. Furthermore, our research focuses solely on amyloid pathology and does not assess tau pathology, an important aspect of AD. The study also had a significant underrepresentation of diverse ethno‐racial groups compared to Whites and non‐Hispanics, emphasizing the need for more inclusive representation in clinical research. In conclusion, females demonstrated both increased rates of dementia and a higher amyloid burden, pointing to a heightened vulnerability to amyloid accumulation. Factors such as age, race, and family history may influence AD pathology differently in males and females. These findings foster a call to action for implementing sex‐ and gender‐based analyses in large‐scale clinical trials and addressing the complex interactions with race and other risk factors to better understand potential differences in the underlying biological and sociocultural mechanisms and address these disparities. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT Maison Abu Raya has nothing to disclose. Ehud Zeltzer has nothing to disclose. Ganna Blazhenets has nothing to disclose. Daniel R. Schonhaut has nothing to disclose. Isabel Elaine Allen has nothing to disclose. Maria C. Carrillo is employed by the Alzheimer's Association. Constantine Gatsonis has nothing to disclose. Lucy Hanna reported funding from the American College of Radiology. Bruce E. Hillner reported receiving grants and clinical trial support from the American College of Radiology and the Alzheimer's Association. Leonardo Iaccarino is currently a full‐time employee of Eli Lilly and Company / Avid Radiopharmaceuticals and a minor shareholder of Eli Lilly and Company. His contribution to the work presented in this manuscript was performed while he was affiliated with the University of California San Francisco. Andrew March is an employee of the American College of Radiology. Nidhi S. Mundada has nothing to disclose. Jhony Mejia Perez has nothing to disclose in the time he worked on this project. Karen Smith has nothing to disclose. Claire Yballa has nothing to disclose. Barry A. Siegel reported receiving grants to institution from ACR during the conduct of the study; personal fees from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Curium Pharma, Progenics Pharmaceuticals, Lantheus Medical Imaging, American Medical Foundation, Siemens Healthineers (spouse), ACR (also for spouse), Capella Imaging, ECOG‐ACRIN Medical Research Foundation (also for spouse), Evicore Healthcare (for spouse), GE Healthcare, Merrimack Pharmaceuticals, and Radiological Society of North America (also for spouse) outside the submitted work; and grants from Curium Pharma, Progenics Pharmaceuticals, and Blue Earth Diagnostics outside the submitted work. Charles Windon received grant funding from NIH, Alzheimer's Association, and Honorariums from American Academy of Neurology, LCN, Kinetix group, Onviv. Rachel A. Whitmer received Alzheimer's Association funding and NIH grants. Casaletto Kaitlin has nothing to disclose. Renaud La Joie consulted for GE Healthcare. Gil D. Rabinovici receives research support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, GE Healthcare, Life Molecular Imaging, Genentech; served as a paid consultant for Alector, C2N, Eli Lilly, Johnson & Johnson, Roche, and Merck; and is a member of the AD Therapeutics Workgroup and an associate editor for JAMA Neurology . Author disclosures are available in the supporting information . CONSENT STATEMENT The American College of Radiology oversaw the IDEAS study, which used a central institutional review board (Advarra, formerly Schulman Associates). Participants consented in writing to the use of their data for future research objectives. This secondary analysis of deidentified data was approved by the University of California San Francisco Institutional Review Board. Supporting information