1 BACKGROUND Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a syndrome characterized by cognitive decline beyond what is expected for an individual's age and education level, yet it does not significantly interfere with daily life activities. , 1 The rate of conversion from MCI to dementia ranges from 8% to 15%, escalating to more than 80% after 6 years. 2 Identified predictors of progressing to dementia in individuals with MCI include older age, female sex, diabetes, apolipoprotein E ( 3 APOE ) ε4 carriership, hippocampal and entorhinal atrophy, lower scores on the Mini‐Mental State Examination or Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), and higher Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale‐Cognition scores. , 4 The high conversion rate from MCI to Alzheimer's disease (AD) not only jeopardizes individual health but also imposes a substantial financial burden on families and societies, making it a pressing global health issue. 5 6 In recent years, diabetes mellitus (DM) has evolved from being primarily a medical concern related to metabolic disturbances to a complex disease with potential impacts that extend beyond blood sugar control, including cognitive impairment and dementia. , 7 , 8 Approximately 20% of patients with DM develop MCI, 9 and those with both MCI and DM face a 1.53 times higher risk of progressing to AD than those without DM. 10 Tighter glycemic control as well as metformin and intranasal insulin treatment may have a beneficial effect on cognitive performance in MCI patients with DM. 11 , 12 , 13 Possible mechanisms of AD progression in patients with DM include insulin resistance, neuroinflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction. 14 The detrimental effects of DM on cognitive functions may be attributed to microstructural disruptions in central neural structures, correlating with pathological derangements in the endocrine profile, as well as deficits in cognitive performance in domains such as memory, information‐processing speed, executive function, and attention, including the frontal and temporal lobes in the cortex; internal and external capsules in the white matter; and hippocampus and thalamus in the subcortex. 15 , 12 Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, as a non‐invasive examination, has been paramount in the clinical identification of MCI and AD. 16 Brain atrophy is the most prominent characteristic of brain structural abnormalities in AD. Subtle structural differences similar to those later expressed with AD can be identified in the brains of MCI patients ahead of any expected onset of AD. 17 RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review : The prevailing hypothesis posits that mild cognitive impairment (MCI) heightens Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk, with diabetes mellitus (DM) potentially exacerbating this vulnerability. However, the optimal therapeutic window for delaying MCI progression to AD and a potential neurobiological target in MCI patients with DM remain unclear. Interpretation : We observed that the first year after MCI diagnosis may represent the optimal therapeutic window for delaying MCI progression to AD in MCI patients with DM. DM appears to act as a catalyst in this progression, accelerate nucleus accumbens atrophy, and reduce gray matter volume and sulcal depth. Future directions : Exploring effective treatments to delay MCI progression to AD in MCI patients with DM within 1 year after MCI diagnosis is needed in future clinical trials. Current research on the conversion from MCI to AD primarily focuses on establishing predictions based on radiomic and metabolomic evidence. , 18 However, few studies have explored the therapeutic window in MCI patients with DM. Therefore, it is crucial to pay attention to effective prevention to delay progression from MCI to AD in patients with DM. The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is an extensive and longitudinal study with the primary objective of exploring the amalgamation of serial MR imaging, positron emission tomography, other biomarkers, as well as clinical and neuropsychological assessments to gauge the risk of and progression to MCI and early AD. 19 In this study, we used the ADNI dataset to explore the optimal therapeutic window in MCI patients with DM and the effect of DM on cognitive‐related brain structures. Moreover, understanding the neurobiological characteristics and their correlation with cognitive performance may provide insights for early clinical interventions and shared target therapies. 20 2 METHODS 2.1 Study population Prior to the commencement of our study, a total of 2429 participants were enrolled after obtaining informed consent. All participants with a history of MCI diagnosis are eligible for inclusion ( n = 1249), encompassing two groups: those initially diagnosed with MCI at baseline and those initially classified as normal cognition at baseline but subsequently developing MCI during follow‐up. Exclusions comprised individuals with less than 1 year of follow‐up ( n = 197), missing key data ( n = 32), and diagnosed with AD before MCI ( n = 4), pre‐diabetes ( n = 12), DM after MCI ( n = 7), or taking oral hypoglycemic agents without DM diagnosis ( n = 17). Ultimately, 980 participants meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria were included in our analysis (Figure 1 ). FIGURE 1 Flow chart of the study. AD, Alzheimer's disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; MCI, mild cognitive impairment. Patients with DM were identified by screening the ADNI participant's medical history database using search terms: diabetes, diabetic, DM, insulin, hyperglycemia, insulin‐dependent diabetes mellitus, non–insulin‐dependent diabetes mellitus, and all hypoglycemic drug names. 2.2 Data collection Data were obtained from the ADNI online database ( www.loni.ucla.edu/ADNI ). Extracted information included demographic details, general clinical data, laboratory results, cognitive function test scores, and radiographic data. Demographic and laboratory data encompassed age, sex, marital status, years of education, and APOE ε4 status (carrier or non‐carrier). Cognitive assessment included score from task 4 of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADASQ4), Participant‐reported Everyday Cognition Scale Plan (EcogPtPlan), Study Partner‐reported Everyday Cognition Scale Organ (EcogSPOrgan), Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), MoCA, and Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning Test immediate recall (RAVLT‐immediate). Additionally, raw structural MR imaging data were downloaded to explore gray matter volume, morphological structure of subcortical nuclei (including thalamus, caudate nucleus, putamen, pallidum, hippocampus, amygdala, and nucleus accumbens), and cortical parameters related to neurodegeneration (including cortical thickness, sulcal depth, and gyrification index). 2.3 Conversion from MCI to AD The current study used the ADNI diagnostic criteria to categorize participants into cognitively normal, MCI, and AD, as previously detailed. In brief, ADNI investigators applied the well‐established Petersen/Winblad criteria for this classification. Our study used a categorical response variable to evaluate the endpoint: the incidence of AD among participants diagnosed with MCI at baseline. Throughout the follow‐up period post‐enrollment, no instances of dementia were recorded that could be attributed to causes other than AD. Consequently, only dementia related to AD was considered in the outcome assessment. For participants initially diagnosed with MCI, the date of MCI to AD conversion was determined as the duration between the baseline MCI visit and the first visit indicating the presence of AD. 21 2.4 Propensity score matching and inverse probability of treatment weighting analysis To address potential selection bias between patients with and without DM, propensity score matching (PSM) and inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) analysis were conducted. Propensity scores, based on age, sex, education, APOE ε4 status, and marital status, were calculated using logistic regression. Patients with DM were matched 1:2 with patients without DM using the nearest neighbor method, maintaining a caliper width of 0.2 standard deviations. Unadjusted differences were characterized using the standardized mean difference. IPTW was implemented to demonstrate the robustness of our statistical methods. The estimated propensity scores were used as weights for patients with DM and the inverse of one minus the propensity score for patients without DM, which generated a weighted cohort. 2.5 Image analysis Detailed information on the structural MR imaging acquisition protocol has been previously reported. The 3D T1 images underwent processing using the Computational Anatomy Toolbox (CAT12), an extension to the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM12) package ( http://dbm.neuro.uni‐jena.de/cat/ ). Key steps included initial voxel‐based processing and subsequent surface‐based processing. For voxel‐based morphometry (VBM), main steps included denoising; bias field correction; intensity normalization; skull stripping; and brain tissue segmentation into white matter, gray matter, and cerebrospinal fluid. Then, these tissues are spatially registered to the standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. The surface‐based morphometry (SBM) was performed following the above steps, including cortical thickness estimation and reconstruction of the central surface; topological correction; surface refinement; and individual central surface registered to the FreeSurfer “FsAverage” template. Before statistical analysis, 8 mm (gray matter), 15 mm (thickness), and 20 mm (gyrification index and sulcus depth) full‐width at half maximum Gaussian kernels were applied. Subcortical shape analysis used the FSL‐FIRST toolkit ( http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/FIRST ). Processing steps included subcortical nuclei segmentation, surface construction, surface registration, and surface deformation calculation. Segmentation quality was controlled following FIRST principles ( https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/FIRST/UserGuide ), and no participants were excluded due to poor segmentation quality. Subsequently, using the FIRST MNI space as a template, each subject's surface mesh was registered to the template mesh. For each subcortical structure, the FSL vertex analysis script, first utils, computed vertex indices. Positive indices indicated outward deformation (expansion), and negative indices indicated inward deformation (atrophy). 2.6 Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were conducted using R software (version 4.2.0, R Foundation for Statistical Computing) and IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows (version 21.0, SPSS Inc.). Significance was set at a two‐sided P value < 0.05. Descriptive statistics included mean (standard deviation) or median with interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables and frequencies or proportions for categorical variables. Normal distribution was confirmed using the Shapiro–Wilk test. For normally distributed data, an independent Student t test assessed significance, while the Mann–Whitney U test was used for skewed distribution. Categorical variables were analyzed using chi‐square or Fisher exact test. VBM and SBM analyses were conducted on the SPM12 using a 2 × 2 factorial design analysis of variance to test for interaction of DM and 12 months of follow‐up. Time effect involved comparison between baseline and the 12‐month follow‐up. After adjusting covariates for balancing the baseline level, group effect was assessed by comparing participants with and without DM. Age and sex are always included as covariates in both VBM and SBM. Total intracranial volume was only used as a covariate for the VBM analysis to scale with brain size. To account for multiple comparisons, false discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied ( P < 0.05). Additionally, cases reaching a significance level of P < 0.001 without FDR correction were also reported to identify potentially noteworthy trends. Group differences in the shape of the subcortical nuclei were assessed using a general linear model for each nucleus using the FSL randomize procedure. Findings were corrected by the threshold‐free cluster enhancement (TFCE) method with 5000 random permutations. Cumulative incidence of conversion from MCI to AD was estimated using the Kaplan–Meier method, with comparison by the log‐rank test. Further, partial correlation coefficients in the absolute and relative differences between significant brain structure changes and cognitive score changes were calculated, with age, sex, education, APOE ε4 status, and marital status adjusted. 3 RESULTS Baseline demographics were compared between patients with and without DM before and after PSM. After PSM, balance between the two groups was achieved for all variables (Table 1 ). TABLE 1 Baseline covariates before and after propensity score matching. Unmatched After PSM a Variables DM group Non‐DM group P value ‡ ASD b DM group Non‐DM group P value ‡ ASD b N 102 878 – – 102 204 – – Age at baseline, mean (SD) 71.7 (7.0) 73.3 (7.4) 0.031 0.230 71.7 (7.0) 71.9 (7.5) 0.800 0.031 Female sex, n (%) 30 (29.4) 371 (42.3) 0.013 0.282 30 (29.4) 51 (25.0) 0.410 0.070 Education at baseline, mean (SD) 15.7 (2.5) 16.1 (2.7) 0.111 0.169 15.7 (2.5) 16.1 (2.8) 0.231 0.145 APOE ε4 carriers, n (%) 42 (41.2) 433 (49.3) 0.119 0.165 42 (41.2) 80 (39.2) 0.741 0.028 Married status at baseline, n (%) 86 (84.3) 679 (77.3) 0.107 0.192 86 (84.3) 179 (87.7) 0.406 0.069 Note : Categorical data are presented as n (%), and continuous data are presented as mean (SD) or median with interquartile range. Abbreviations: APOE , apolipoprotein E; ASD, absolute standardized mean difference; DM, diabetes mellitus; PSM, propensity score matching; SD, standard deviation. a PSM was perform 1:2 using nearest neighbor method within a caliper width of 0.2 standard deviations without replacement. b ASD was calculated to compare the two matched groups after matching. ‡ Statistically significant ( P < 0.05). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Regarding the conversion from MCI to AD, Kaplan–Meier survival curves did not show statistical significance ( P = 0.28) between patients with and without DM (Figure 2 ). However, there was a trend suggesting an accelerated conversion from MCI to AD within 12 months after MCI diagnosis in patients with DM. MCI patients with DM had a higher proportion of AD at the 12‐month follow‐up compared to those without DM (8.82% vs. 2.45%, P = 0.026). By applying IPTW, we created a pseudo‐sample consisting of 973 patients in the DM group and 980 patients in the non‐DM group. Kaplan–Meier survival curves did not show statistical significance ( P = 0.750) between patients with and without DM (Figure S1 in supporting information). However, MCI patients with DM had a higher proportion of progression to AD at the 12‐month follow‐up compared to those without DM (8.32% vs. 5.31%, P = 0.008). FIGURE 2 Kaplan–Meier curves depicting MCI to AD conversion and comparison of AD proportions at 12‐month follow‐up between patients with and without DM. AD, Alzheimer's disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; MCI, mild cognitive impairment. As shown in Table 2 , compared to patients without DM, those with DM exhibited worse cognitive function, as indicated by assessments such as MoCA at baseline, and EcogSPOrgan, FAQ, MoCA at the 12‐month follow‐up (all P < 0.05). Patients with DM experienced significant decreases in cognitive levels from the perspective of absolute differences (ADASQ4, EcogPtPlan, and RAVLT‐immediate) and relative difference (RAVLT‐immediate; P < 0.05). TABLE 2 Comparison of cognitive function between the patients with and without DM. Variables Baseline 12‐month Absolute difference a Relative difference b DM group Non‐DM group P value ‡ DM group Non‐DM group P value ‡ P value ‡ P value ‡ ADASQ4, mean (SD) 5.13 (2.26) 5.19 (2.42) 0.833 5.51 (2.41) 5.12 (2.76) 0.227 0.047 0.068 EcogPtPlan, mean (SD) 1.45 (0.59) 1.57 (0.67) 0.280 1.59 (0.66) 1.52 (0.58) 0.482 0.030 0.054 EcogSPOrgan, mean (SD) 1.76 (0.82) 1.53 (0.654) 0.053 2.00 (0.94) 1.65 (0.73) 0.022 0.335 0.304 FAQ, mean (SD) 3.26 (4.40) 2.73 (3.69) 0.285 5.31 (6.60) 3.80 (4.84) 0.049 0.052 0.186 MOCA, mean (SD) 22.47 (3.79) 23.68 (2.78) 0.024 22.44 (3.23) 23.56 (3.21) 0.021 0.828 0.517 RAVLT‐immediate, mean (SD) 34.79 (11.14) 34.75 (9.71) 0.975 33.01 (11.62) 34.81 (11.10) 0.204 0.033 0.034 Note : Continuous data are presented as mean (standard deviation). Abbreviations: ADASQ4, score from task 4 of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale; DM, diabetes mellitus; EcogPtPlan, Participant‐reported Everyday Cognition Scale Plan; EcogSPOrgan, Study Partner‐reported Everyday Cognition Scale Organ; FAQ, Functional Assessment Questionnaire; MOCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; RAVLT‐immediate, Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning Test immediate recall; SD, standard deviation. a Absolute difference was calculated as follows: value at 1‐year follow‐up—value at baseline. b Relative difference was calculated as follows: [(value at 1‐year follow‐up—value at baseline)/value at baseline] × 100%. ‡ Statistically significant ( P < 0.05). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Morphological analysis of subcortical nuclei revealed that, compared to those without DM at baseline, patients with DM presented a notable inward concave surface and mild atrophy in the left nucleus accumbens (FDR corrected, P < 0.05; Figure 3A ). During the 12‐month follow‐up, the left nucleus accumbens in patients with DM continued to display a significant inward concave surface, indicating sustained atrophy (Figure 3B ). In addition, the right nucleus accumbens in patients with DM at 12‐month follow‐up also displayed a significant inward concave surface, signifying atrophy (FDR corrected, P < 0.05; , Figure 3C ). FIGURE 3 Morphological analysis of subcortical nuclei in patients with and without diabetes mellitus: left nucleus accumbens at baseline (A) and 12‐month follow‐up (B), and right nucleus accumbens at 12‐month follow‐up (C). VBM analysis for gray matter volume revealed the significant differences in time and group effects (both FDR corrected, P < 0.05, Figure 4 ). However, there was no significant difference in interaction (group × time) effect (uncorrected P < 0.001). FIGURE 4 Voxel‐based morphometry analysis of gray matter volume from group (A) and time effects (B). DM, diabetes mellitus; FDR, false discovery rate. Patients with DM showed a significant decrease in sulcal depth compared to those without DM during the 12‐month follow‐up (FDR corrected, P < 0.05; Figure 5A ). Meanwhile, there were significant differences regarding sulcal depth (Figure 5A ), gyrification index (Figure 5B ), and cortical thickness (Figure 5C ) in time effect during the 12‐month follow‐up (FDR corrected, all P < 0.05). FIGURE 5 Patients with DM showed a significant decrease in sulcal depth compared to those without DM during the 12‐month follow‐up (FDR corrected, P < 0.05; A). Meanwhile, there were significant differences regarding the sulcal depth (A), gyrification index (B), and cortical thickness (C) in time effect during the 12‐month follow‐up (FDR corrected, all P < 0.05). As shown in Figure 6 , a significant negative correlation was observed between the changes in EcogSPOrgan score and left cluster of sulcal depth ( r = −0.35, P = 0.029; r = −0.35, P = 0.025; r = −0.35, P = 0.026; r = −0.38, P = 0.016) as for the patients with DM. A similar correlation was also observed between the changes in FAQ score and Cluster3 of gray matter volume ( r = −0.31, P = 0.025; r = −0.34, P = 0.014; r = −0.36, P = 0.010; r = −0.33, P = 0.018). Regarding the patients without DM, the absolute differences in left cluster of sulcal depth was negatively correlated with the absolute ( r = −0.21, P = 0.040) and relative ( r = −0.23, P = 0.026) changes in EcogSPOrgan score. In addition, the absolute differences in FAQ score were negatively correlated with the absolute ( r = −0.20, P = 0.047) and relative ( r = −0.20, P = 0.043) changes in left cluster of sulcal depth. FIGURE 6 Correlation between brain structures and cognitive function changes in patients with DM (A) and without DM (B). (* represents P < 0.05). ADASQ4, score from task 4 of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale; DM, diabetes mellitus; EcogPtPlan, Participant‐reported Everyday Cognition Scale Plan; EcogSPOrgan, Study Partner‐reported Everyday Cognition Scale Organ; FAQ, Functional Assessment Questionnaire; MOCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; RAVLT‐immediate, Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning Test immediate recall. 4 DISCUSSION The substantial social and economic impact of AD, coupled with the lack of effective treatments, underscores the urgent need to address this public health challenge. MCI is associated with an elevated risk of progressing to AD. Early identification of individuals at high risk for MCI‐to‐AD conversion is crucial for implementing timely interventions and managing the disease effectively. In our study, we observed that DM is linked to notable cognitive decline and an increased , , risk of progression to AD in patients with MCI, particularly within the first year of follow‐up. DM also exerts an adverse impact on specific brain structures, and a significant correlation exists between these structural changes and cognitive function alterations. These findings offer potential targets for interventions aimed at improving cognition in patients with DM, thereby potentially delaying the conversion from MCI to AD. A meta‐analysis has highlighted DM as the sole independent predictor of conversion from MCI to dementia. In the present study, the conversion rate from MCI to AD within 12 months after diagnosis was notably higher in patients with DM. However, there was no significant difference in conversion rate between patients with and without DM on the whole, which suggested that DM does not ultimately influence the clinical outcome of MCI patients. This suggests that DM may act as a catalyst in the MCI‐to‐AD conversion, and the optimal therapeutic window for MCI patients with DM could be the first year after diagnosis. DM and AD are complex, chronic, and progressive conditions. More diabetic patients undergo standardized hypoglycemic treatment as the duration of DM progresses, and the use of certain hypoglycemic drugs may not only control blood sugar but also improve cognitive function during the long‐term follow‐up. Furthermore, the impact of DM on the conversion from MCI to AD during the later stages of progression needs in‐depth investigation in the future. 4 In our study, we observed distinct changes in brain structures induced by DM. Over the 12‐month follow‐up period, DM resulted in sustained atrophy of the nucleus accumbens. While previous imaging analyses in AD or MCI have predominantly focused on cortical changes, particularly in vulnerable regions such as the hippocampus or entorhinal cortex, , 22 it is crucial to note that subcortical atrophy has also been observed in dementia and preclinical stages of cognitive impairment. 23 , 24 DM emerges as one of the most critical risk factors for subcortical atrophy. 25 Consistent with findings from Yi et al., 26 who reported that volume loss in the nucleus accumbens is associated with an increased risk of progression from MCI to AD, our study extends this understanding by demonstrating that DM not only accelerates nucleus accumbens atrophy but also further promotes the conversion from MCI to AD. The brain, now recognized as an insulin‐sensitive tissue and a vital regulator of systemic glucose metabolism, 27 plays a crucial role in modulating peripheral glucose metabolism through dopaminergic signaling in the nucleus accumbens. Optogenetic activation of dopamine D1 receptor‐expressing neurons in the nucleus accumbens has been shown to increase glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in mice. 28 , 29 Moreover, bilateral deep brain stimulation of the nucleus accumbens in diabetic patients resulted in a substantial reduction in insulin requirements. 30 The nucleus accumbens, a part of the ventral striatum, is susceptible to cognitive dysfunction through its connections to limbic areas in AD or the elderly. 30 A recent experiment suggested that the pro‐mnemonic effects of a dopamine transporter inhibitor in a social recognition memory test may be, in part, mediated via increased dopamine neurotransmission in the nucleus accumbens. 31 Therefore, the nucleus accumbens could represent a novel shared link between DM and AD, emphasizing the opportunity to explore common therapeutic targets. 32 In terms of MR imaging, decreases in gray matter volume and sulcal depth were noted in MCI patients with DM. While there were no differences in gyrification index and cortical thickness between patients with and without DM, the utility of sulcal depth measurement may be more focal to specific brain areas and cognitive measures. The decline in gray matter volume is strongly correlated with the decrease in cognitive function levels. 33 Patients with MCI and AD both exhibit varying degrees of gray matter atrophy. 34 Previous research using quantitative surface‐based methods suggested significantly greater sulcal widening and shallower sulcal depth with disease progression from normal cognition to MCI and MCI to AD. 35 MCI patients with DM have been shown to exhibit significantly reduced gyrification index in the bilateral insular cortex, with altered gyrification index correlating with DM duration, global cognition, and episodic memory, suggesting its potential as a neuroimaging biomarker for predicting DM‐related MCI. 36 In our study, sulcal depth but not gyrification index was affected by DM, particularly in the fusiform region associated with dementia. 37 38 To gain a deeper understanding, we assessed the correlation between brain structures and cognitive dysfunction. Subcortical volume reduction, indicative of cognitive deterioration, was expected to be correlated with cognitive status, as seen in prior studies. , 27 , 39 Stronger correlations were observed in MCI patients with DM in our study. This finding is noteworthy and warrants further exploration in future studies. 40 Despite these insights, our study has limitations. First, the identification of participants with DM relied on self‐reported medical history, which might lack completeness or accuracy concerning the duration, severity of DM, or glycemic control. Second, although some MCI patients complained of cognitive decline history ahead of enrollment in the ADNI database, there was a discrepancy between the cognitive decline history and baseline cognitive level after standardized screening and diagnosis. The definition of “the first year post mild cognitive impairment diagnosis” is based on the timing of MCI diagnosis in the ADNI database. It mimics the disease diagnosis in the clinical setting. However, there may be some length‐of‐time biases among the enrolled patients. Future studies using a digital medical history could provide more reliable data to confirm the findings presented in our study. Third, considering the difference in cognitive level between the two groups at baseline, we mainly observed the absolute and relative changes in cognitive scale scores during the 12‐month follow‐up period. Fourth, despite being a longitudinal investigation involving 1249 participants with MCI, our study had a relatively small sample size in the DM group, particularly after PSM. Hence, we implemented an IPTW method, created a pseudo‐sample consisting of 973 patients in the DM group and 980 patients in the non‐DM group, and obtained similar results. The generalizability and robustness of our findings warrant validation in larger cohorts. In conclusion, our study provides deeper insights into the impact of DM on MCI‐to‐AD conversion, offering critical implications for delaying MCI progression to AD. The first year after MCI diagnosis may represent the optimal therapeutic window in MCI patients with DM. DM appears to act as a catalyst in the progression, accelerating nucleus accumbens atrophy, reducing gray matter volume and sulcal depth, and further promoting the conversion of MCI to AD. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare no conflicts of interest. CONSENT STATEMENT Clinical data used in the preparation of this manuscript were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu; downloaded on June 12, 2023). The ADNI was launched in 2004 as a public–private partnership, led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, M.D. Written informed consent was obtained for participation in these studies, as approved by the institutional review board at each participating center. For up‐to‐date information, see www.adni‐info.org . Supporting information