1. Introduction Chronic pain is a commonly reported symptom in middle-aged and older population and its prevalence steadily increased in the past two decades ( Zimmer, Zajacova, & Grol-Prokopczyk, 2020 ; Zimmer & Zajacova, 2018). The physical and psychological consequences of chronic pain have major deleterious effects on older adults’ cognitive abilities ( Baker, Gibson, Georgiou‐Karistianis, & Giummarra, 2018 ; Pickering, Zwakhalen, & Kaasalainen, 2018 ). A growing body of evidence from cross-sectional and logitudinal studies indicates that chronic pain symptoms have been linked to the development of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRDs) ( Innes & Sambamoorthi, 2020b ). The extant studies suggest a positive association between different types of chronic pain and incident ADRDs ( Ezzati et al., 2019 ; Innes & Sambamoorthi, 2020a ; James & Ferguson, 2019 ; Khalid, Sambamoorthi, & Innes, 2020 ; Sangha, Thakur, Akhtar, Ramani, & Gyamfi, 2020 ; Tzeng et al., 2018 ; Yamada et al., 2019 ), although studies varied widely in pain sites (e.g., back or knee) and types, study population (mainly focus on aged 65 and older), and length of follow-up (range from 2 to 16.5 years) ( Innes & Sambamoorthi, 2020b ). Even though the majority of these studies exclude pre-existing cognitive impairment or dementia to prevent the reverse causality, it does not eliminate other potential selection bias such as the predisposing factors of chronic pain being related to the development of ADRDs, which may distort the primary association. The evidence on longitudinal association of chronic pain to cognitive decline remain relatively sparse and inconclusive ( Leeuw et al., 2018 ; Mazza, Frot, & Rey, 2018 ; Veronese et al., 2018 ; Whitlock et al., 2017 ). A prospective cohort study with 10,065 individuals aged 62 years and older concluded that persistent moderate-to-severe pain as a risk factor for an accelerated rate of memory decline over a 10-year follow-up period ( Whitlock et al., 2017 ), whereas other two longitudinal studies did not find that the presence of pain was associated with cognitive decline among older people aged 65 years and older ( Leeuw et al., 2018 ; Veronese et al., 2018 ). The conflicting findings about the relationship between chronic pain and cognitive function may be attributed to the inconsistent measures used to assess cognitive function in different studies ( Leeuw et al., 2018 ; Veronese et al., 2018 ; Whitlock et al., 2017 ). For instance, in Whitlock et al.’s study, only one aspect of cognitive function (i.e., memory) was investigated. Clinically, cognitive impairment can be divided into two categories: mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and ADRDs. Given that an average of 32–38% of MCI patients developed dementia within 5 years ( Mitchell & Shiri‐Feshki, 2009 ; Ward, Tardiff, Dye, & Arrighi, 2013 ), investigating the association between chronic pain and clinically-defined MCI provides evidence for pain management interventions in the early stage. This study used 11-year administrative health insurance claims data along with the propensity-score matching approach to investigate whether patients aged 50 or over with chronic non-cancer pain (CNCP) are more likely to have incident MCI/ADRD, compared to pain-free counterparts. We hypothesized that newly diagnosed CNCP patients have a higher risk of developing MCI/ADRDs. 2. Methods 2.1. Data and Study Sample This study used administrative health insurance claims data from the Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics ® Data Mart Database, including both employer-sponsored plans and Affordable Care Act Exchange plans. The de-identified database used for this study is a specific sample comprised of approximately 22 million patients enrolled in the care network and had ever been prescribed any controlled drugs from 2007 through 2017. The database also included information on health insurance enrollment and sociodemographics (e.g., education level, household income, race/ethnicity). The Institutional Review Board of Indiana University approved the study. The de-identified dataset was analyzed in 2019. Our analyses were limited to patients aged ≥50 who were continuously enrolled in a health insurance plan for more than two consecutive years in order to ensure completeness of a patient’s diagnosis records. Continuous enrollment was defined as having no health insurance coverage gap of more than 31 days during the study period ( Ku and Platt, 2022 ), including both the look-back and follow-up phases. Patients were excluded from this study if they had any diagnosis of: 1) cancer throughout the enrollment period; 2) CNCP; 3) MCI, ADRDs, or alcoholic and drug-induced persisting dementia; 4) acute pain, HIV, multiple sclerosis, or Parkinson disease before the index date (described below); and 5) follow-up period less than 6 months after index date. These criteria allowed us to identify new CNCP as well as incident MCI and ADRD patients, minimizing the possibility of a false attribution to existing or previous symptoms for the outcomes of the present study. Figure 1 shows the sample flow chart. 2.2. Research Design This study used a retrospective study design with the follow-up periods ranged from a half to 9 years to examine the study hypotheses ( Figure 2 ). We created an index date for each patient to define the look-back (before the index date) and follow-up (after the index date) periods where the look-back period was two years or longer to ensure a long-enough period to capture the presence of pre-existing related conditions ( Davis et al., 2022 ). Specifically, to determine eligible CNCP patients based on physician diagnosis, the date of the first physician visit for CNCP two years after the initial enrollment was used as the index date. Eligible CNCP patients should have at least one additional CNCP diagnosis within 1 year after the index date. When identifying eligible non-CNCP patients, a similar approach was used to determine the index date. For example, if a patient had never been diagnosed with CNCP during the enrollment period, his/her index date was the date of the first physician visit two years after enrollment. Subsequently, eligible patients with and without CNCP were matched based on the propensity score models (details to be described later). Matched patients were then followed up until the time they developed MCI/ADRDs, or the date of a censoring event (the end of health insurance enrollment). As suggested by a systematic review ( Mazza et al., 2018 ), pain is not the only factor responsible for cognitive impairment or dementia. It is also possible that premorbid risk factors that predispose adults to chronic pain may show cognitive dysfunction. Therefore, selection bias may occur if those factors also contribute to the difference between patients who developed MCI/ADRDs and those who did not during the follow-up period. To reduce the potential selection bias, we employed a propensity-score-matched cohort design ( Seeger, Williams, & Walker, 2005 ) in order to obtain comparable CNCP and non-CNCP groups at each time block. We used six months for each time block, resulting in up to 17 half-year blocks of calendar time from January 2009 to June 2017 ( Appendix Figure S1 ). Within each time block, each eligible CNCP patient was matched to a contemporaneous non-CNCP patient, where unmatched CNCP patients were discarded from the following matching processes. The matched cohorts (n=170,900 patients) were followed up from the date of matching to the date of occurrence of MCI, ADRD or the censoring events for survival analysis. The propensity-score-matched cohort design has been used in observational study using claims data, which has the advantage that each matched cohort preserves the baseline comparability with regard to the observed characteristics ( Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983 ; Seeger et al., 2005 ). 2.3. Outcomes and Exposure Measures 2.3.1. Outcome variables. Mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease or related dementias (including Alzheimer’s disease, unspecified dementia, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, and Lewy body dementia). MCI and ADRDs were defined according to the codes of the International Classification of Disease, Ninth and Tenth Revisions, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM). Appendix Table S1 shows the diagnosis codes used to identify MCI and ADRDs. Incident MCI and ADRDs were defined as the first occurrence of a diagnosis after the time of matching. 2.3.2. Primary exposure. Chronic non-cancer pain. In this study, CNCP included general chronic pain ( James & Ferguson, 2019 ), back pain ( Yamada et al., 2019 ), fibromyalgia ( Tzeng et al., 2018 ), osteoarthritis ( Innes & Sambamoorthi, 2020a ), arthritis/joint pain ( Yamada et al., 2019 ), and rheumatoid arthritis ( Sangha et al., 2020 ), which have been shown to be associated with cognitive impairment or certain subtypes of dementia. Appendix Table S1 shows the ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes of CNCP. Once a patient was diagnosed with CNCP, the patient was retained in the exposure group until the end of the follow-up period. 2.3.3. Covariates. Sociodemographics included age, sex, self-reported race/ethnicity, education level, and household income. Based on the literature ( Patel, Guralnik, Dansie, & Turk, 2013 ; Pickering et al., 2018 ), we also adjusted for other comorbidities that may affect the relationships of CNCP with MCI/ADRDs, including type-2 diabetes, hypertension, cerebrovascular disease, tobacco use disorder, and alcohol use disorder. These comorbidities were ascertained based on ICD-9-CM/ICD-10-CM codes and coded as time‐dependent binary variables. Time-varying pain medication use (Y/N), including opioid analgesics and non-opioid analgesics (Allegri et al., 2018; Dublin et al., 2015 ; Pask, Dell’Olio, Murtagh, & Boland, 2020 ), was included as a potential confounder in the final models. All comorbidities and pain medication use were coded as time-varying variables. 2.4. Statistical Analysis To reduce potential selection bias between patients with and without CNCP, we created the matched sample using the 1:1 nearest-neighbor matching based on propensity scores. First, a logistic regression model was used to estimate propensity scores for having CNCP based on the patients’ age, sex, race/ethnicity, education level, as well as pre-existing conditions including hypertention, type-2 diabetes, major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia, tobacco use disorder, and alcohol use disorder over the 1-year period preceding their index dates. These covariates have been shown to be highly correlated with chronic pain and cognitive function in previous research ( Blyth & Waite, 2010 ; van Hecke, Torrance, & Smith, 2013 ). Then, each CNCP patient was matched with a non-CNCP patient within the recommended caliper size that equals to 0.2 standard deviation of the logit of the predicted propensity scores ( Austin, 2009 ). To ensure that matched cohorts were adequately balanced, we used the “PSMATCH” procedure in SAS software, version 9.4 to check the overall balance after matching ( SAS Institute Inc., 2016 ). Additional bivariate tests were conducted to compare group differences in sociodemographic characteristics and common comorbidities between the CNCP and non-CNCP groups, using a t-test for the continuous variable (age), a Kruskal-Wallis test for the ordinal categorical variable (household income), and Chi-square tests for other nominal categorical variables such as sex, race/ethnicity, education level, comorbidities, and pain medication use. We also reported the absolute difference in these variables and computed the effect sizes such as Cohen’s d for the continuous variable, and Cramer’s V for categorical variables to compare group differences. Cohen’s d less than 0.2 is considered a small effect size and a Cramer’s V of 0.1 indicates small effect ( Cohen, 2013 ). On the matched sample, survival analysis was conducted using time-dependent Cox proportional-hazards model to test the research hypotheses. The outcome variable was the time from the date of matching to the occurrence of MCI/ADRD or a censoring event. Two separate time-dependent Cox proportional-hazards models were fit, adjusting for the aforementioned covariates, to examine the association between CNCP and the risk of incident MCI and ADRDs, respectively. Both models generated hazard ratios (HRs) with their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). All statistical analyses were performed using SAS version 9.4 ( SAS Institute Inc., 2016 ). A p -value of .05 was considered the threshold for statistical significance. 2.5. Sensitivity Analysis A series of sensitivity analyses were performed to examine the effects of interactions between CNCP status and all covariates on the risks of MCI/ADRDs. We found a slightly higher risk of developing ADRDs in CNCP patients who have been diagnosed with diabetes or hypertension during the follow-up period. In addition, CNCP patients who have been prescribed pain medication have a slightly greater risk of incident ADRDs, compared to their counterparts. Subgroup analysis for adults aged 65 and older found similar results. To ensure age is balanced between the two groups at the individual level, we also performed matching on both propensity score and age (in 5-year bin increments). The additional matched sample yielded the same conclusion and similar risk estimates as the results based on the matching only on propensity scores. There is no clinical guideline that states the average time for a CNCP patient to develop MCI/ADRDs. In our main analysis, we excluded subjects with follow-up period less than 6 months because it is unlikely that a newly diagnosed CNCP leads to MCI/ADRDs within 6 mounths. We further performed three subgroup analyses for subjects who were followed up at least 1, 2, or 3 years after the index date, respectively. The results are similar and therefore only primary results were reported. We also performed a repeated analysis but excluding CNCP patients with rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia, because these two diseases may work through a different mechanism to cause cognitive decline compared to other etiologies. Since we excluded all pre-existing CNCP patients during the 2-year look-back period, these two diagnoses were rare in the newly diagnosed CNCP cohort. Our conclusions were unchanged when excluding the rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia sub-populations. 3. Results Tables 1 presents the descriptive statistics for the study population. There were 17 matched cohorts and a total of 170,900 matched patients with/without CNCP who were eligible for analyses. The median follow-up time was 2.5 years (mean[SD]=3.2[2.4]; IQR=3.3; range: 0.5–9 years), and a total of 1,038 (0.6%) developed MCI and 3,986 (2.3%) developed ADRDs. Among CNCP patients, 0.9% developed MCI and 3.2% developed ADRDs. Among non-CNCP patients, 0.3% were diagnosed MCI, and 1.5% were diagnosed ADRDs during the follow-up period. After matching, all variables except sex and household income statistically differed between two groups but the group differences were trivial (Cohen’s d < 0.2 and all Cramer’s Vs <0.1). Based on the results of PSMATCH procedure ( SAS Institute Inc., 2016 ), two measures of balance diagnosis were examined for each matched cohort. The standardized difference of the means of propensity scores between groups were within the recommended limits (i.e., −0.25 and 0.25) and the ratio of variances of propensity scores were between 0.5 and 2 ( Stuart, 2010 ). This indicates that most of the before-matching group differences between the CNCP and non-CNCP groups were eliminated via the propensity-score matching. Table 2 reports the impact of CNCP on the risk of MCI or ADRDs. After adjusting for sociodemographic variables and time-varying comorbidities, there was a significant association between CNCP and incident MCI (HR=2.23; 95% CI: 1.92, 2.58). Namely, CNCP patients were approximately 2 times more likely to be diagnosed MCI compared with patients without CNCP. Likewise, compared to patients without CNCP, patients with CNCP had a higher hazard of ADRDs (HR=1.44; 95% CI: 1.34, 1.54). 4. Discussion This study analyzed 11-year administrative health claims data to examine the associations between CNCP and development of MCI/ADRDs. The main result shows that newly diagnosed CNCP patients aged 50 or older had a higher risk of developing MCI/ADRDs, compared to non-CNCP patients of the same age group, after adjusting for other comorbidities that are known to be related to MCI/ADRDs. In agreement with previously published longitudinal studies ( Cao, Fisher, Yu, & Dong, 2019 ; Ezzati et al., 2019 ; Innes & Sambamoorthi, 2020a ; Khalid et al., 2020 ; Tzeng et al., 2018 ), our findings based on newly diagnosed CNCP patients provide empirical evidence that CNCP is indeed a risk factor for incident ADRDs. While previous studies provide inconsistent evidence on the association of CNCP to cognitive decline based on cognitive battery tests ( Leeuw et al., 2018 ; Veronese et al., 2018 ; Whitlock et al., 2017 ), our findings indicate that CNCP patients have a greater risk of developing MCI. While confirming findings in the extant literature, our study makes two notable contributions. First, unlike previous studies that did not exclude pre-existing conditions of chronic pain, our study followed the cohort of patients who were newly diagnosed with CNCP without diagnoses of MCI, ADRDs, Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis, AIDS, cancer, and acute pain at least 2 years before their first diagnosis of CNCP. Thus, our study provides robust evidence of an association between CNCP and development of MCI/ADRDs in middle-aged and older adults using a more rigorous study design than previous works. In addition, our study employed a propensity-score matched cohort design to select comparable patients with and without CNCP, which minimized potential selections bias ( Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983 ; Seeger et al., 2005 ). Although the causal relationship between chronic pain and incident cognitive impairment or dementia has yet to be expounded, the cumulative evidence alludes to a potential mechanism by which chronic pain may impair cognition. The hallmarks of impaired cognitive function related to chronic pain include that the presence of pain may interrupt cognitive processing and require attention to reduce chronic pain, resulting in competition for limited attentional resources ( Eccleston & Crombez, 1999 ). Additionally, the presence of pain may also lead to discernible brain changes in grey matter volume ( Malfliet et al., 2017 ) and the posterior parietal cortex and the middle cingulate that are both related to memory function ( Buckalew, Haut, Morrow, & Weiner, 2008 ). A recent review study pointed out that chronic pain may increase central neuroinflammation in certain brain regions which contributes to microglial dysfunction ( Cao et al., 2019 ). Moreover, the diminished attentional capacity may have a cumulative effect on cognitive functioning, which leads to more chronic deterioration of cognitive functioning over time ( Leeuw et al., 2015 ). Using more rigorous sample selection criteria and robust inference methods than prior studies that examined this issue, we were able to demonstrate that chronic pain itself could be a cause of MCI/ADRDs. There were limitations to the present study. First, due to the nature of administrative claims data, our results only reflect the situation in the insured population. This potentially limits generalizability to uninsured, underinsured, or individuals outside this insurance network, who may have different health care access and experiences. This is a common limitation of administrative claims-based research. This kind of large administrative database, however, allowed us to adopt a strict sample selection procedure, ruling out subjects with pre-existing conditions while still retaining adequate statistical power to examine the research questions. Second, cognitive impairment was determined by clinical diagnosis, and therefore minor, unreported, and unmeasurable changes in cognitive abilities may not have been observed. Nevertheless, the diagnosis of MCI is an important precursor of ADRDs. On average, 32–38% of people with MCI develop one type of dementia during a 5-year follow-up period ( Mitchell & Shiri‐Feshki, 2009 ; Ward et al., 2013 ). Therefore, investigating the risk factors of MCI may be beneficial in delaying or preventing dementia. Third, the severity of pain was not considered due to data unavailability. Fourth, our study’s follow-up durations, averaging 3.6 years among CNCP patients and 2.8 years among non-CNCP patients, provided critical early insights but may not capture the full long-term progression to MCI and ADRDs, especially in younger demographics. In addition, because mortality data are unavailable from our dataset, our models did not adjust for competing risk of death, which might overestimate the risk of CNCP on MCI/ADRD. However, it is indicated in a previous study that when the mortality is low in the study population, the difference in risk estimate between Cox regression and the competing risk approach is minor ( Berry, Ngo, Samelson, & Kiel, 2010 ). Given that our study population is relatively young (aged 50 and older), the impact of survival bias on our study results may be small. Despite the aforementioned limitations, this study makes several critical contributions to understanding the association of CNCP with development of MCI/ADRDs. This study assessed cognitive impairment based on clinical diagnoses rather than cognitive assessment tests ( Leeuw et al., 2018 ; Veronese et al., 2018 ; Whitlock et al., 2017 ). Most importantly, this study applied the propensity-score matched cohort design to identify comparable cohorts of patients with and without CNCP, which provided more valid inferences. 5. Conclusions Our findings demonstrate that suffering from CNCP is a significant risk factor for MCI/ADRDs among middle-aged and older adults. This study provides strong evidence that chronic pain should be carefully and effectively managed by patients and healthcare providers to reduce MCI/ADRDs risks. Health education is needed to inform patients with chronic pain in managing pain and recognizing symptoms of cognitive impairment. Healthcare providers should be encouraged to improve early diagnosis of chronic pain and conduct appropriate pain management in order to reduce the risk of developing mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementias among people living with CNCP. Supplementary Material