1. Introduction β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology is a defining pathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) detectable by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or positron emission tomography (PET) ( Mattsson et al., 2014 ). Cognitively-normal individuals with Aβ pathology (Aβ+) are said to have preclinical AD ( Sperling et al., 2011 ) and have increased risk of cognitive decline ( Petersen et al., 2015 ) and progression to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) compared to those without Aβ pathology ( Knopman et al., 2012 ). However, cognitive decline with progression to MCI also occurs without significant amyloid pathology, for example in depression, cerebrovascular disease ( Gorelick et al., 2011 ) and Lewy body disease ( Mckeith, 2006 ). It is unclear if development of prodromal AD differs from other causes of cognitive decline in terms of specific cognitive or functional deficits, or in measures of brain structure and function. To understand the earliest stages of AD it is essential to study the transition from preclinical to prodromal AD and compare it to other causes of cognitive decline. Knowledge regarding this process may be used to improve the design of clinical trials aimed at preventing the earliest stages of AD. The optimal cohort to study the transition from preclinical to prodromal AD is a cohort of cognitively-normal individuals, both with and without Aβ pathology, who develop MCI. It might be expected that early-stage AD subjects (subjects with Aβ pathology) would have lower scores on measures of memory function compared to subjects who develop MCI in the absence of Aβ pathology (Aβ− progressors). Aβ− progressors might instead be expected to have a greater incidence of cerebrovascular disease, increased prevalence of white matter lesions ( Snyder et al., 2015 ), frontal lobe atrophy rather than atrophy in the temporoparietal regions associated with AD ( Whitwell et al., 2007 ), and greater impairments in nonmemory cognitive domains ( Kramer et al., 2007 ). Few studies have been done on individuals progressing from normal cognition to MCI, comparing preclinical AD with Aβ− progressors. Here we present such a study, where we tested if the presence of Aβ affected neuropsychological measures, tau biomarkers, brain atrophy, white matter lesions, depressive symptoms and brain glucose metabolism in 75 cognitively healthy controls who progressed to MCI during up to 10 years of follow-up. 2. Methods 2.1 Participants Data were obtained from the ADNI database ( adni.loni.usc.edu , www.adni-info.org ). The population in this study included ADNI-1 and ADNI-2 participants that (1) were enrolled into the cognitively-normal or subjective memory complaint cohorts, (2) progressed to an MCI diagnosis per site physician and monitor review and captured in the ADNI database, (3) were tested for CSF biomarkers or amyloid PET, and (4) were followed longitudinally for MRI, FDG-PET and neuropsychological testing. 2.2 Amyloid PET PET Aβ data was acquired by the ligand C11-PiB in ADNI-1 and the ligand F18-florbetapir in ADNI-2. Methods used to acquire and process PET data were described previously (see http://adni.loni.usc.edu/methods/ and ( Landau et al., 2012 )). We used previously established thresholds for PiB-PET (SUVR > 1.4) and florbetapir-PET (SUVR > 1.1) to identify the presence of Aβ pathology. Amyloid PET scans were available for 60 participants with an average of 2 scans done, 2 years apart (see Supplementary Methods for more details). 2.3 Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker concentrations For the 15 individuals without Aβ PET scans, amyloid status was determined using CSF amyloid. CSF samples were collected by lumbar puncture and shipped on dry ice to the ADNI Biomarker Core laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center for long-term storage at −80°C. CSF Aβ 42 was measured using the multiplex xMAP Luminex platform (Luminex Corp, Austin, TX) with the INNOBIA AlzBio3 kit (Fujirebio/Innogenetics, Ghent, Belgium) ( Olsson et al., 2005 ). We used a previously defined threshold of CSF Aβ 42 < 192 ng/L to identify the presence of Aβ pathology ( Shaw et al., 2009 ). We also compared Aβ progression groups on baseline and longitudinal change of CSF phosphorylated tau (p-tau) and total tau (t-tau), also analyzed using the xMAP Luminex platform with the INNOBIA AlzBio3 kit. 2.4 Cognitive and Functional Outcomes Cognitive measures assessed were the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) ( Folstein et al., 1975 ), Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale ( Rosen et al., 1984 ) 13-item version (ADAS13), immediate and delayed logical memory recall from the Wechsler Memory Scale (iMemory, dMemory) ( Wechsler, 1987 ), immediate and delayed Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (iAVLT, dAVLT) ( Rey, 1958 ), Trail Making Test parts A and B (Trails A and B) ( Reitan, 1958 ), Boston Naming Test ( Williams et al., 1989 ), Category Fluency ( Morris et al., 1989 ), and the Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite, comprising the MMSE, delayed Logical Memory, Trails B, and delayed recall portion of the ADAS13 ( Donohue et al., 2017 ). The functional status measures assessed were the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) ( Morris, 1993 ) and the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ) ( Pfeffer et al., 1982 ). Aβ+ progressors and Aβ− progressors were compared on symptoms of depression with the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) ( Yesavage et al., 1983 ). Finally, individual items from the CDR-SB and FAQ were assessed. 2.5 MRI Structural magnetic resonance imaging brain scans were acquired using 1.5T MRI for ADNI-1 subjects and 3.0T MRI for ADNI-2 subjects. We used a standardized protocol including T1-weighted MRI scans using a sagittal volumetric magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence ( Jack et al., 2008 ). Automated volume measures were performed with FreeSurfer (FS). Our primary analysis included data on lateral ventricle volume and combined volumetric measures from different FS ROIs. These combined regions are described in Supplementary Table 1 . In an exploratory analysis, we estimated group differences on all FS regions, separately. P-values from the analysis of FS regions were adjusted using a false discovery rate correction. We also analyzed white matter hyperintensity volumes estimated based on run-time PD (proton density)-, T1-, and T2- weighted structural magnetic resonance images of the brain ( Schwarz C, Fletcher E, DeCarli C, 2009 ). 2.6 Brain metabolism FDG-PET image data were acquired and processed as described previously ( Landau et al., 2012 ). We used mean FDG-PET counts of the temporal region, angular region and cingulate regions. 2.7 Statistical analysis Subjects were classified as Aβ+ if they were positive for any amyloid measurement taken during follow-up. Two subjects became Aβ+ during follow-up, while all other Aβ+ subjects were positive at the initial Aβ measurement. Baseline associations between demographics, medical history, neuropsychiatric inventory (NPIQ) ( Kaufer et al., 2000 ) and Aβ status were assessed. Continuous variables were evaluated using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and categorical variables with Fisher's Exact test. Subjects were followed for up to 10 years for neuropsychological testing and up to four years for imaging measures (MRI and FDG-PET). Longitudinal measures were modeled using linear mixed-effects regression with a spline function to capture departures from linearity in the trajectory of the outcomes ( Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990 ). Because ADNI-1 used 1.5T MRI scanners and ADNI-2 used 3T scanners, we evaluated MRI differences both within each study separately and also together, while adjusting for scanner type. MRI models were adjusted for intracranial volume, scanner type, age and gender. We also evaluated clustering subjects within scanner type as part of the mixed-models. Responses were converted to z-scores for comparability. Likelihood ratio tests were used to evaluate longitudinal trajectory differences. All models were adjusted for demographics (age, gender and education), depression symptoms, APOE ε4 allele status and intracranial volume for MRI models. Individual items from the CDR-SB and FAQ were also assessed. For additional details on the FAQ items, see Supplementary Table 3 . Survival regression was used to model the effect of Aβ on the time to the initial endorsement of CDR-SB and FAQ items, separately. Time to progression to MCI was modeled with survival regression, assuming a Weibull distribution. Significance of tests was reported using two sided p-values. All analyses were preformed in R v3.3 ( www.r-project.org ). See the Supplementary Methods for full statistical analysis details. 2.8 Ethics Ethical review boards at all involved study centers approved the study. All subjects gave written informed consent. 3. Results 3.1 Study population We included 75 subjects who progressed to MCI during a median follow-up of 4 years (IQR: 2.0, 5.8) in the Aβ+ group and 3 years (IQR: 1.7, 5.3) in the Aβ− group, (p=0.49). Detailed information on follow-up sample sizes is included in Supplemental Table 2 . Forty subjects (53.3%) were Aβ+ and 35 (46.7%) were Aβ−. There was no relationship between the modality used to measure Aβ (CSF or PET) and Aβ-positivity. For those whose CSF was used to determine Aβ status, 53% were Aβ+; similarly for PET, 53% were Aβ+ (p>0.99). Aβ+ progressors were older on average compared with Aβ− progressors (78 vs 75 years old, p=0.015) and had a higher frequency of APOE ε4 alleles (47.5% vs 20%, p=0.02). There were no significant group differences in education (p=0.44), gender (p=0.35), or proportion of subjects with subjective memory complaints (p=0.46). There were no group differences on history of psychiatric (p=0.28), neurological (p=0.41), cardiovascular (p=0.46), hypertensive (p>0.99), hepatic (p>0.99) or endocrine/metabolic (p=0.82) symptoms. There were no group differences on the NPIQ total (p=0.16) or individual items (p>0.17), with the exception of the depression/dysphoria item (p=0.007), where 18% of the Aβ− progressors endorsed symptoms of depression/dyphoria compared to 0% of the Aβ+ progressors, at baseline. Aβ+ progressors also had a lower frequency of depressive symptoms at baseline compared to Aβ− progressors on the GDS (p=0.03), but longitudinal development of depressive symptoms did not differ by Aβ status (χ 2 =0.32, p=0.85). 3.2 Progression to MCI Time to MCI did not differ between the groups (β = 0.07, p = 0.73, Supplementary Figure 1 ). The median time to progression was approximately 2.5 years for both groups. Thirty (85.7%) Aβ− and 36 (90%) Aβ+ subjects were clinically diagnosed with MCI due to AD. The remaining Aβ− progressors were diagnosed with MCI due to corticobasal degeneration (N=2), normal pressure hydrocephalus (N=1), vascular disease (N=1), and unknown (N=1). The remaining Aβ+ progressors were diagnosed with MCI due to Parkinson’s disease (N=1), vascular disease (N=2) and a pituitary macro adenoma (N=1). 3.3 Cognition Cognitive measures are shown in Figure 1 . There were no group differences at baseline. There were no longitudinal differences in MMSE, ADAS13, dAVLT, iAVLT, or category fluency. Aβ+ progressors showed significantly worse decline on the PACC, dMemory, iMemory, BNT, Trails A and Trails B. Estimates are summarized in Table 1 . 3.4 CDR-SB and FAQ Functional measures are shown in Figure 2 . There were no significant group differences at baseline or over time in CDR-SB. Aβ+ progressors tended toward faster decline in FAQ (p=0.09). Estimates are summarized in Table 1 . We also assessed the individual items from the CDR-SB and FAQ ( Figure 3 ). CDR-SB items were modeled assuming a Weibull distribution, while FAQ items were best modeled assuming a Gaussian distribution. FAQ items were more frequently endorsed (answered yes to the item) at baseline, and as such were left-censored at baseline, resulting in a better fit when assuming a Gaussian distribution. CDR-SB items were almost never endorsed at baseline. There were no significant differences between Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors on any CDR-SB item. Estimates, confidence intervals and p-values are summarized in Table 2 . There were no significant differences between Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors on any FAQ item, although Aβ+ progressors tended toward shorter time to endorsement on the Event (keeping track of current events) item. 3.5 Brain structure MRI measures of brain structure are shown in Figure 4 . There were no group differences at baseline or over time in any MRI ROI, p>0.13). There were no differences in the results when the 1.5T and 3T scans were analyzed separately or when the scanner type adjustment was removed from the model. There was faster accumulation of white matter hyperintensities in Aβ− progressors, (β=0.14, p=0.05). 3.6 Brain glucose metabolism FDG-PET measures of brain glucose metabolism are shown in Figure 4 . Aβ+ progressors showed faster decline in metabolism in the temporal lobe (β=−0.11, p=0.02) and the cingulate gyrus (β=−0.15, p=0.003), and tended toward faster decline in the angular gyrus (β=−0.09, p=0.07). There were no differences in FDG-PET in any region at baseline (p>0.23). 3.7 CSF p-tau and t-tau CSF tau information was available for 30 Aβ+ and 28 Aβ− subjects. Of these, 23 Aβ+ and 17 Aβ− subjects had longitudinal CSF data available. Aβ+ progressors had significantly higher CSF p-tau concentrations at baseline (β=0.55, p=0.05). There were no significant group differences in change over time in CSF p-tau (χ 2 =2.10, p=0.35). There were no significant differences in baseline CSF t-tau (β=0.23, p=0.47) or change over time (χ 2 =2.14, p=0.34). 4. Discussion We examined the role of Aβ pathology in the progression from normal cognition to MCI, with regard to function, cognition, CSF tau, symptoms of depression, brain structure and metabolism. The main findings include 1) Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors had similar time to MCI, despite Aβ+ progressors declining significantly faster on tests of memory, executive function, processing speed and language. 2) Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors showed similar rates of decline on the CDR-SB, although there was some evidence for accelerated functional decline on the FAQ. 3) Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors had similar rates of brain atrophy, although Aβ− progressors demonstrated a significantly faster rate of white matter lesion accumulation over time, and Aβ+ progressors showed greater decline in temporal and cingulate brain metabolism. 4) Aβ+ progressors had elevated levels of CSF p-tau at baseline. 5) Aβ− progressors endorsed more baseline depressive symptoms. 6) Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors were classified as MCI due to AD to the same degree by the diagnosing physicians. Our findings show that progression from preclinical to prodromal AD differs substantially from other causes of early cognitive decline both in terms of specific cognitive domains and also imaging and biomarker characteristics. Still, several commonly used tools to monitor progression to MCI do not readily identify Aβ− associated decline and careful selection of neuropsychological and biomarker assessments should be used to facilitate identification and follow-up of preclinical AD in screening programs and clinical trials. Several studies have shown that increased age, shorter education, presence of APOE ε4, subtle cognitive decline, and cognitive complaints are risk factors for progression to MCI ( Oulhaj et al., 2009 ). Further, AD-like combinations of CSF biomarkers ( Li et al., 2007 ) or increased brain atrophy rates may also predict progression to MCI, although baseline CSF biomarkers or brain structure may not always predict progression to MCI ( Vemuri et al., 2009 ). Aβ+ progressors declined faster than Aβ− progressors on the PACC, a cognitive composite designed to capture early decline associated with Aβ deposition. Aβ+ progressors also declined faster on individual domains including immediate and delayed memory recall, executive function (Trails B), processing speed (Trails A) and language (BNT), indicating that these domains are more specific to cognitive decline in preclinical AD, compared with the decline seen in the Aβ− progressors. The Aβ groups did not differ significantly on more general measures of cognition (MMSE and ADAS13), which is convergent with the findings from the functional scales, and highlights the difficulties in identifying early-stage clinical AD by general cognitive scoring instruments. In contrast, the immediate and delayed recall of the AVLT test (list learning) did not differ between the groups. These results have implications for the design of clinical trials aimed at people with early-stage AD. First, the fact that logical memory tests, but not AVLT, differentiated between Aβ+ and Aβ− progression is consistent with our previous finding that logical memory produced higher power estimates than AVLT when used as an outcome measure in a hypothetical trial of preclinical AD ( Insel et al., 2015 ) and points to the importance of selecting specific instruments to achieve a high specificity for Aβ-associated cognitive decline during the progression to MCI. Further, the disconnect between the CDR memory item, which was not associated with Aβ, and the logical memory test, which was strongly associated with Aβ, suggests that specific functional tests should be used in clinical trials in order to optimize the chance of detecting functional changes that are related to the cognitive changes of early-stage AD. Assessments could consist of a composite of specific functional items, perhaps preferably from the FAQ scale or another sensitive functional measure like the Amsterdam ADL scale. More research is needed on the specific functional items that are associated with the early stages of AD. The findings that Aβ− and Aβ+ progressors had similar time to MCI, and similar overall functional decline (measured by CDR-SB and FAQ, although the groups were marginally divergent on FAQ), indicate that the overall degree of functional impairment did not differ substantially between early-stage AD and other causes of decline from normal cognition. Further, the groups did not differ significantly on individual CDR items (including the memory item) or FAQ items. The finding that progressors had a similar burden of brain atrophy, while preclinical AD subjects had greater decline in temporal and cingulate brain metabolism, fits with a disease model where changes in metabolism precede brain atrophy during the development of AD. This is in agreement with a recent study where we found (in MCI subjects) that changes in metabolism (and cognition) appeared at earlier stages of Aβ pathology compared to changes in brain structure ( Insel et al., 2016 ). The fact that the pattern of brain atrophy did not differ between the groups also fits with a previous study where Aβ− cognitively-normal people had considerable overlap with the atrophy seen in preclinical AD ( Fjell et al., 2013 ). The increased rates of white matter hyperintensity volume in Aβ− is consistent with their increased depressive symptoms ( de Groot et al., 2000 ). The magnitude of this effect may have been mitigated by ADNI inclusion criteria limiting inclusion to subjects with a Hachinski score ≤4, which may have excluded Aβ− individuals with a high likelihood of developing white matter lesions. The finding that CSF p-tau was increased already at baseline in Aβ+ progressors is in line with previous findings of increased CSF p-tau in preclinical AD ( Mattsson et al., 2017 ) and suggests that these subjects were in a state of tau-related neuronal injury or vulnerability already at baseline. Furthermore, the Aβ+ progressors did not change over time in CSF p-tau levels, despite that they likely accumulated increasing amounts of brain tau pathology during this time, given the known correlation between tau pathology and clinical symptoms of AD ( Nelson et al., 2017 ). The lack of longitudinal increases in CSF p-tau is in line with previous studies showing only very modest correlations between CSF p-tau and the total amount of brain tau load visualized by tau PET in AD ( Gordon et al., 2016 ; Mattsson et al., 2017 ). Increased CSF p-tau may therefore primarily indicate a presence of tau related pathology, rather than being a measure of the total amount of tau in the brain. We also note that CSF t-tau was not increased in Aβ+ progressors. Together, this may suggest that CSF p-tau is a more sensitive marker than CSF t-tau for the effects of very early stage AD pathology on tau metabolism. The finding that endorsement of depressive symptoms was more common in Aβ− progressors suggests that subsyndromal depression may precede and exacerbate cognitive decline in a subgroup of Aβ− progressors ( Sacuiu et al., 2016 ). Finally, the finding that progressors from both groups were classified as MCI due to AD to the same degree by experts blinded to the Aβ data stresses the difficulties in identifying early-stage AD by clinical characteristics alone, even in a selected group of amnestic MCI patients. This further supports the use of biomarkers to identify AD in early stages of the disease. This study systematically examines the role of Aβ in the progression from normal cognition to MCI. The strengths of the study include a relatively large sample size, given the difficulty of observing normal to MCI progression prospectively, a long follow-up time, and inclusion of a broad array of neuropsychological tests and biomarker modalities that are potentially dynamic during the early stages of AD. However, the study also has some limitations. Despite rather large and clinically meaningful differences between the Aβ groups, such as ADAS13 and FAQ, which both show 0.75 SDs of additional decline in the Aβ+ group, these estimates remained nonsignificant. These comparisons were likely underpowered. Although ADNI subjects are extremely well characterized, they come from a selected sample, which may affect the generalizability of the findings. For most subjects, we used PET imaging to identify Aβ pathology, but a proportion of PET Aβ negative subjects may have positive CSF biomarkers of Aβ pathology ( Mattsson et al., 2015 ). Those subjects may in fact have early stages of Aβ pathology (Palmqvist Natu Comm 2017), and including them in the Aβ− group may therefore reduce the difference between the Aβ− and Aβ+ groups. However, by using the standard thresholds for Aβ positivity we make our results more applicable to the general community of AD researchers and clinical trial designers. The fact that Aβ− progressors were younger than Aβ+ progressors may reflect the fact that incipient Aβ pathology is strongly associated with higher age ( Jansen et al., 2015 ) and also suggests that causative factors in Aβ− progressors (which may include subsyndromal depression and unidentified genetic risk factors) are less age-dependent. All main analyses were adjusted for age, which makes it unlikely that the detected group differences were driven by age. Tau burden is of central interest and may explain some of the observed differences in cognitive trajectories. Tau pathology may be estimated by either CSF or PET biomarkers. CSF tau biomarkers may be elevated early in the disease process, but also plateau quite early, while tau PET measures may continue to increase in intensity throughout the clinical stages of the disease ( Mattsson et al., 2017 ).Unfortunately, tau PET was not available for these individuals. In conclusion, we found that progression from preclinical to prodromal AD is different from progression to MCI due to other causes of decline in terms of cognition, development of brain hypometabolism, and accumulation rates of white matter lesions, but not in terms of overall longitudinal function or other measures of brain structure. These results differ, in part, from previously described hypothetical models of the sequence of biomarker changes in AD ( Jack et al., 2013 ) in that in this analysis, we see differences in glucose metabolism and cognitive functioning in the absence of structural brain differences between the two Aβ pathology groups. This has implications for both the etiology of progression and clinical trial design. People with preclinical AD are currently recruited into clinical trials of novel treatments where the goal is to achieve disease-modification and reduce decline in cognition and function. Our results may be used to tailor outcome measurements in such clinical trials, and may also be used in screening programs or online registries to facilitate identification of subjects who are in preclinical stages of AD. Supplementary Material