1. Introduction The clinical and pathological heterogeneity in Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD) presents a variety of challenges to clinicians and researchers including accurate and timely diagnosis, prognostication, monitoring, and identification of appropriate endpoints in clinical trials. Neuroimaging offers a powerful set of tools to visualize structural, functional, and pathological changes associated with FTLD. This is particularly true of the three most common clinical presentations of sporadic FTLD - behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA), and non-fluent/agrammatic variant PPA (nfvPPA) – as the neuroanatomical and hypometabolic signatures of these three syndromes are generally well defined. In this chapter, we selectively review evidence supporting the utility of neuroimaging biomarkers in bvFTD, svPPA, and nfvPPA, with an emphasis on current and future clinical applications. We begin by discussing patterns of abnormalities and diagnostic utility among those neuroimaging methods most commonly used in clinical settings, including structural T1 and FDG-PET. This is followed by a review of imaging methods used in research settings that show a promising role in clinical settings or as endpoints in clinical trials. 2. Imaging modalities commonly used in clinical settings Consensus diagnostic criteria for bvFTD, svPPA, and nfvPPA include neuroimaging as the major biomarker to aid in confident clinical diagnosis with an emphasis on structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) ( 1 , 2 ). 2.1 Structural MRI Structural MRI is widely used in clinical practice to visualize regional brain atrophy, with quantitative methods employed in research ( 3 – 7 ) and in some clinical practice settings ( 8 ). In bvFTD, structural imaging studies consistently demonstrate atrophy patterns that implicate frontal (orbitofrontal, middle frontal gyrus, rostromedial prefrontal cortex, pre-supplementary motor cortex), insula (dorsal and ventral anterior insula extending to posterior insula at late stages), anterior/mid cingulate cortex (ACC/MCC), anterior temporal lobes and subcortical structures (basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus), as well as cerebellum (see figure 1 ) ( 9 – 11 ). For review see ( 6 ) and for meta-analyses see ( 12 – 14 ). Despite a relatively predictable atrophy pattern there remains considerable heterogeneity across patients. One study employed cluster analyses and identified four distinct neuroanatomical subtypes: frontal dominant, temporal dominant, frontotemporal, and distributed temporofrontoparietal ( 15 ). A subcortical dominant subtype has also been described ( 16 , 17 ). Brain atrophy in fronto-insula-cingulate regions is present at the earliest stages of the disease, although less pronounced ( 9 , 18 ). The right temporal variant of FTLD has been variably characterized as semantic dementia or bvFTD but is generally associated with prominent behavioral symptoms largely typical of bvFTD often accompanied by prosopagnosia and semantic memory loss ( 19 – 22 ). With time, atrophy progresses to include more distributed frontal, temporal, and insular cortices as well as parietal regions and ventricular expansion (see figure 2 ) ( 9 , 23 – 25 ). Automated longitudinal MRI volumetry has demonstrated that structural MRI is sensitive to frontal atrophy progression in a period as short as six months after baseline ( 26 ). Peak atrophy at baseline in svPPA has been reported in the anterior temporal pole (left > right hemisphere), extending to include frontoinsula, subgenual ACC, left middle and inferior temporal gyri, fusiform gyri, amygdala and basal forebrain (see figure 1 ) ( 12 , 27 – 33 ). In this regard, svPPA presents with similar atrophy distribution as the temporal dominant subtype of bvFTD with more atrophy in left relative to right hemisphere ( 15 ). However, in contrast to bvFTD, svPPA has greater atrophy in the fusiform gyrus and relatively spared frontal as well as dorsal anterior cingulate cortex ( 23 , 34 ). With disease progression, atrophy in svPPA becomes more distributed to include the middle and inferior frontal gyri, posterior temporal gyrus, and inferior parietal lobule ( 7 , 28 , 34 – 36 ). Atrophy usually continues to be left-lateralized but spreads to homologous regions of the right hemisphere (see figure 2 ) ( 36 , 37 ). The rate of temporal gray matter loss can be 3–4% per 6 months ( 26 ), which is a higher rate of temporal atrophy than any other FTD variant ( 38 ). In nfvPPA, peak atrophy is found in the inferior frontal gyrus, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and supramarginal gyrus of the left hemisphere (see figure 1 ) ( 32 , 36 ). Compared to both svPPA and bvFTD, nfvPPA demonstrates greater progressive atrophy in the parietal lobes ( 23 ) but relatively spared bilateral temporal pole, parahippocampal, entorhinal, fusiform, inferior temporal, middle, and left superior temporal gyrus ( 35 ). Over time, atrophy in nfvPPA progresses to include more widespread left superior and middle frontal gyri, anterior insula, superior temporal gyri, transverse temporal gyrus as well as premotor areas, and caudate (see figure 2 ) ( 30 , 31 , 35 , 36 , 39 ). In general, as atrophy progresses in both PPA variants, the pattern becomes less specific (though remains generally left-lateralized) and merges with each other to include major regions involved in language processing ( 40 ). Within clinical settings, T1-weighted MRI is used nearly universally to increase confidence in the likely pathological changes in patients with these clinical syndromes ( 41 ). In most clinical practice settings, planar images are inspected visually (see figure 3 ), which has been shown to be predictive of likely neuropathologic changes post-mortem ( 42 ). Although not yet routinely used in clinical practice, a variety of fully automated, observer-independent atrophy quantification methods have been developed, including voxel-based morphometry, single-subject whole-cortex general linear models, machine learning-based individual subject classification models ( 26 , 32 , 42 – 45 ). A few of these methods are beginning to be employed in clinical practice settings ( 46 , 47 ). A number of studies have examined the sensitivity and specificity of quantitative analysis of MRI volumetrics for diagnosis. In a recent multicenter structural MRI study, Meyer, Mueller ( 48 ) applied pattern recognition algorithms to regional brain atrophy and predicted diagnosis of bvFTD (vs. healthy controls) with high accuracy of up to 84.6%. In another study, grey matter density based machine learning classification of bvFTD vs. AD outperformed the classification that was based on neuropsychological test results ( 49 ). Similarly, diagnostic criteria for PPA support patterns of brain atrophy specific to the regions outlined above. Recently, MRI-based cortical thickness was shown to classify a single patient as belonging to one subtype of FTD with high accuracy: 86% healthy controls vs dementia (FTD and AD), 90.8% of AD vs. FTLD, 86.9% bvFTD vs PPA and 92.1% svPPA vs nfvPPA ( 44 ). Atrophy in right frontotemporal regions successfully discriminates bvFTD from PPA; atrophy in the left frontal lobe discriminates nfvPPA from svPPA, and atrophy in the bilateral anterior temporal cortex discriminates svPPA from bvFTD and nfvPPA ( 44 , 50 ). Another study reported a similar high accuracy (78%) of discrimination between svPPA and nfvPPA ( 43 ). Despite the high predictive power of structural MRI in distinguishing FTLD subtypes from each other and from other neurodegenerative diseases, more research is needed to validate findings in unselected cases in clinical practice settings ( 51 , 52 ). Studies are underway to identify the best MRI measures that could serve as clinical trial endpoints in FTLD. Findings are variable without clear convergence on optimal regions of interest across FTLD variants ( 24 , 53 ). Even within variants, differences in peak atrophy across patients impact effect sizes. Binney, Pankov ( 53 ) estimated a sample size of 103 bvFTD, 31 nfvPPA, and 10 svPPA to be able to detect a 40% reduction in annual rate of regional atrophy. In that study, the most sensitive regions of interest were the medial and lateral frontal gyri, the insula, striatum, and temporoparietal junction bilaterally for bvFTD, the superior and ventral anterior temporal, mid-to-posterior lateral temporal, and medial frontal cortices for svPPA, and the dorsomedial and lateral frontal cortices with predominant involvement of the precentral and perisylvian regions for nfvPPA. In a study of PPA ( 40 ) with all three major subtypes found that atrophy in the left perisylvian temporal cortex including insula and surrounding temporal regions may be a highly sensitive measure of disease progression and a promising endpoint for clinical trials. As small as 10 participants per arm can have 80% power to detect 40% slowing of atrophy ( 40 ). A follow up proof of concept study of optimal MRI endpoints in clinical trials in PPA further found that a composite with weighted averages of regional volumes within the left perisylvian temporal cortex can reduce sample size relative to total ROI by 38% ( 54 ). Most recently, Staffaroni, Ljubenkov ( 55 ) reported that gray matter volume in frontal and temporal lobes predicted longitudinal change across all FTLD subtypes. Further, sample size predictions to detect a 40% reduction in decline following a therapeutic intervention (54 bvFTD, 34 svPPA, and 29 nfvPPA) were better than or comparable to estimates for clinical measures alone (e.g., functional assessment questionnaire). Notably, bvFTD yielded the largest confidence intervals across all measures and metrics of white matter integrity (discussed below) yielded the smallest predicted sample sizes. 2.2 FDG-PET PET with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose tracer enables the quantification of cerebral glucose metabolism as a proxy measure of neural activity. This biomarker has been found to have greater sensitivity and specificity to neurodegeneration relative to measures of perfusion using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT; ( 56 )), although SPECT is more widely available. Patterns of hypometabolism in FTLD generally precede and correlate with the spread of atrophy (see figure 1 ) ( 57 ). In samples with bvFTD, hypometabolism has been identified in the orbitofrontal, dorsolateral and medial prefrontal, insular, and cingulate cortices ( 58 , 59 ). Subcortical structures, particularly the caudate nucleus, are also affected ( 60 – 62 ). Cluster analyses have also delineated two bvFTD subgroups with frontal (dorsolateral, medial, and ventromedial prefrontal cortices) and temporal-limbic (temporal poles, hippocampal formation, lateral temporal cortex, amygdala, thalamus) hypometabolic signatures. The frontal subgroup was associated with greater executive dysfunction and a faster rate of clinical decline, suggesting that differential patterns of hypometabolism can predict clinical outcomes. ( 63 , 64 ). However, less is known about metabolic changes with disease progression. Some evidence suggests that over a 1–2 year follow up period, worsening hypometabolism is observed in regions implicated at baseline accompanied by a progression of hypometabolic activity into inferior frontal, parietal, and temporal regions ( 58 , 65 ). Among PPA variants, reduced metabolism is primarily left lateralized, particularly earlier in the disease. Hypometabolism in svPPA has been most consistently reported in the temporal poles, middle and inferior temporal gyri, and insula ( 63 , 66 , 67 ), with some studies also demonstrating thalamic ( 68 ), medial temporal (hippocampus and amygdala), fusiform, and superior temporal involvement. nfvPPA is associated with a heterogenous metabolic pattern ( 69 ), with evidence of hypometabolism in superior and inferior (particularly the pars opercularis and pars triangularis) frontal, dorsolateral prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and insular regions ( 67 , 70 ). Reduced metabolic activity in the thalamus and temporal cortices have also been reported (See Figure 1 ) ( 68 ). Hypometabolism spreads posteriorly towards the precentral gyrus in those with nfvPPA who progress to develop parkinsonism and towards the anterior temporal lobe in those who developed motor neuron disease ( 67 ). FDG-PET has been approved for reimbursement by the U.S. Center for Medicare Services, but unfortunately many private insurance companies still do not reimburse for its use in the U.S. Consensus groups have identified FDG-PET as an effective and recommended diagnostic tool to identify FTLD (see figure 3 )( 71 ) and differentiate FTLD from AD or Lewy Body Disease pathology ( 72 ). Utilizing FDG-PET to identify FTLD in MCI stages is also recommended, though this is understudied and requires additional formal investigation ( 73 ). Visual assessments of FDG-PET scans in a clinical setting are generally accurate, with 89.6–92% accuracy, 81–86% sensitivity, and 94–98% specificity, in the differential diagnosis between AD and FTLD ( 74 , 75 ). The distinguishing pattern of hypometabolism that informs this differential follows a dissociation between anterior and posterior cortical areas, with reduced metabolic activity in frontal, but not posterior, regions predicting FTLD pathology ( 76 ). Statistical regions of interest and parametric mapping analyses improve diagnostic accuracy and further underscore the utility of this biomarker in clinical settings ( 74 , 77 – 80 ). Only a small handful of studies have investigated the diagnostic utility FDG-PET in PPA variants, but these have provided compelling evidence supporting its use in clinical settings ( 81 ). One study found that visual ratings resulted in 87.8% sensitivity and 90% specificity to differentiate between PPA and cognitively normal patients; statistical analyses improved these numbers to 95.70–96.9% and 90%, respectively ( 82 ). The diagnostic accuracy of using FDG-PET to differentiate between PPA variants also yields sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy values above 90% ( 82 ). A number of case studies have also documented the utility of FDG-PET in diagnosing PPA ( 83 , 84 ). 2.3 Amyloid-PET PET imaging with amyloid tracers measures insoluble fibrillar amyloid largely reflecting neuritic plaques, one of two core neuropathologic changes seen in AD. Amyloid PET has little clinical utility in the evaluation of a patient with a typical presentation of nfvPPA, svPPA, or bvFTD. Its primary value is in patients presenting with a dysexecutive-behavioral or complex language syndrome that is not typical of FTLD or AD, but where AD is a possibility ( 85 , 86 ). Most experts would recommend that FDG-PET be performed first, and if the case is still ambiguous amyloid PET could be considered. The important challenge, though, is that even though amyloid PET is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and by the European Medicines Agency, reimbursement is generally not available outside the context of research. An amyloid PET scan showing elevated signal in a patient with a typical FTLD clinical syndrome may be an indicator that AD is a co-existing pathologic change along with FTLD ( 87 , 88 ). Co-morbid AD and FTLD pathologies are not infrequent ( 89 ), especially in older age. Analyses of elevated signal on amyloid PET in svPPA and nfvPPA have generally concluded that the frequency of “positive” amyloid PET scans increase with age at the same rate as in cognitively normal adults ( 90 – 92 ). Thus, amyloid PET imaging may be useful in clinical settings with complicated cases in which AD remains on the differential diagnosis after comprehensive workup, but is not considered a routine element of the workup of a patient with a typical FTLD clinical syndrome. 2.4 Multimodal imaging in FTLD in clinical practice A multimodal approach to differential diagnosis appears to improve classification accuracy, particularly when integrating structural and metabolic imaging. The combination of T1-weighted MRI and FDG-PET imaging (see figure 3 ) distinguishes between other neurodegenerative disorders and bvFTD with 82.5% accuracy, svPPA with 97.5% accuracy, and nfvPPA with 87.5% accuracy ( 93 ). Combined T1-weighted MRI and FDG-PET also distinguish between bvFTD and psychiatric disease with 96% sensitivity and 73% specificity, suggesting that this approach may reduce the number bvFTD patients that are misdiagnosed with psychiatric illness ( 49 ). Ultimately, sensitive and specific molecular biomarkers are badly needed for these conditions. 3.0 Imaging Modalities Utilized in Research Contexts Only Although not yet used clinically, there are a number of additional informative neuroimaging modalities that can elucidate the pathophysiology underlying FTLD, inform differential diagnosis, and, in some cases, have the potential to be valuable in clinical trials. These include diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI), arterial spin labeling (ASL) MRI, and tau PET. 3.1 Diffusion tensor imaging DTI characterizes white matter microstructural integrity by measuring directionality (fractional anisotropy [FA]) and diffusivity (mean diffusivity [MD]) of water molecules along white matter tracts. Decreased FA and increased MD suggests degeneration of white matter fibers and compromised structural connectivity within the brain. There is a robust literature demonstrating widespread alterations in white matter tracts in FTLD (See figure 4 ). When compared to both AD and control groups, bvFTD is associated with bilateral white matter alterations in tracts underlying frontal and temporal lobes ( 94 ). Studies have demonstrated either reduced FA or increased MD in the superior longitudinal fasciculus, anterior cingulum, corpus callosum and uncinate fasciculus ( 95 – 98 ). The inferior longitudinal fasciculus and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, along with fronto-striatal and fronto-thalamic pathways have also been implicated ( 94 , 99 – 102 ). Longitudinal studies have demonstrated progression of abnormalities in these tracts, particularly in the uncinate fasciculus, corpus callosum, and paracossal cingulum ( 103 , 104 ), and suggest that further progression to parietal and occipital white matter can be expected ( 105 ). White matter alterations in bvFTD are associated with greater behavioral symptom severity ( 96 , 100 ) and reduced integrity in the corpus callosum over a 2 year follow-up is associated with a decline in executive functioning ( 104 ), further underscoring the value of this modality in tracking disease progression in bvFTD. In contrast, the PPA subtypes demonstrate more focal white matter alterations in tracts that originate from and terminate in brain regions important for language. svPPA is associated with relatively circumscribed alterations to white matter in ventral pathways projecting to the left temporal lobe early in the disease, with particular emphasis on uncinate and inferior longitudinal fasciculi ( 54 , 70 , 94 , 106 ). Reduced FA in the external capsule and cingulum bundle has also been reported ( 107 ). With disease progression, further degeneration extends bilaterally to the non-dominant frontotemporal, uncinate, and anterior inferior longitudinal fasciculi ( 54 , 108 , 109 ). Cross-sectional alterations in nfvPPA relative to control samples are most notable in left frontotemporal and frontoparietal projections of the superior longitudinal and uncinate fasciculi ( 54 , 94 ). Alterations in the frontal aslant tract and in white matter projections from the basal ganglia to premotor and motor cortical areas have also been reported ( 70 , 106 , 110 , 111 ). Over time, white matter degeneration in both PPA variants spread from left to right hemisphere, though posterior tracts remain relatively spared ( 54 ). Although not used clinically, DTI has proven to be a promising biomarker to inform differential diagnosis and monitor disease progression in FTLD. FA in the corpus callosum and uncinate fasciculus is particularly helpful in differentiating between FTLD and controls ( 112 ), AD patients ( 113 ), and among FTLD variants ( 95 ). Some studies have shown that DTI outperforms structural gray matter volumetric and FDG-PET in differentiating bvFTD from controls ( 114 ) and from other FTLD variants at the group level ( 115 ). However, another found that DTI remains less sensitive than FDG-PET at the single subject level ( 116 ). Further studies are needed to evaluate the potential added value of combining DTI with structural MRI or FDG-PET. Specifically, FA in the corpus callosum and grey matter volume in the precuneus and posterior cingulate provided optimal classification between a combined FTLD group and AD. A similar white and gray matter solution was found to optimally distinguish between FTLD variants, yielding classification accuracies of 90% in bvFTD, 80% for svPPA, and 100% for nfvPPA ( 5 , 117 ). A combination of grey (left temporal pole and pars opercularis) and white matter (left uncinate and inferior longitudinal fasciculi) structural integrity also appears to maximally distinguish between PPA variance with 89% accuracy, 92% sensitivity, and 85% specificity ( 118 ). Finally, with regard to clinical trials, DTI measures of corpus callosum integrity is a potential clinical trial endpoint that requires the smallest sample sizes to detect clinical change ( 55 , 112 ). Thus, while it is unlikely that DTI will take the place of traditional neuroimaging biomarkers currently used in clinical settings, it may offer additive value that is worth further investigation in the context of clinical trials. 3.2 Resting state functional MRI rs-fMRI measures intrinsic functional connectivity between brain regions to detect synchronous patterns of low-frequency fluctuations in blood oxygen level dependent signals. From a network perspective, this modality has been critical in identifying groups of brain regions in healthy populations that are functionally related yet spatially distinct ( 119 – 122 ). In general, rs-fMRI studies in FTLD demonstrate altered connectivity in established networks that closely follow distributed atrophy patterns identified in FTLD (see figure 4 ). The most robust finding in bvFTD is reduced functional connectivity within the salience network ( 123 – 125 ), with primary nodes in the ACC/MCC, frontoinsula, middle frontal gyrus, and subcortical regions in the striatum and amygdala ( 120 , 121 ). Abnormalities in this network are associated with compromise in behavioral and socio-emotional functioning that are a hallmark of bvFTD ( 121 , 126 ). Reduced connectivity between frontal and limbic structures within the salience network has also been observed ( 125 , 127 , 128 ). Paralleling other reports of neuroanatomical and functional subgroups within bvFTD, Ranasinghe, Rankin ( 16 ) reported four distinct patterns of network dysfunction encompassing the frontotemporal dominant salience network, frontal dominant salience network, a subcortical network, and a semantic appraisal network (temporal pole, ventral striatum, subgenual cingulate, and basolateral amygdala). Graph theory models have documented a decline in major network nodes in both frontotemporal regions with relative sparing of posterior cortical areas ( 129 , 130 ). Indeed, several studies have demonstrated either equivalent or even increased connectivity within the default mode network relative to controls and AD, suggesting the possibility of a compensatory response in the context of alterations in frontotemporal networks ( 124 , 131 ). Over time, however, network disruption does progress posteriorly to involve frontoparietal and default mode networks ( 132 ). Alterations in rs-fMRI also closely follow atrophy patterns among PPA variants. Consistent with the Posterior-Medial Anterior-Temporal framework proposed to dissociate regions underlying semantic and episodic memory ( 133 ), networks anchored in anterior temporal regions important for semantic memory appear to be most vulnerable to disruption in svPPA. Specifically, there is reduced connectivity between the anterior temporal lobe and distributed cortical and subcortical areas, including modality specific cortical regions, which support the role of the anterior temporal lobe as a critical transmodal hub within the semantic network (see figure 5 ) ( 33 , 134 , 135 ). Others have documented decreased connectivity and reduced network hubs in ventral regions of (i.e., middle temporal gyrus and angular gyrus) while increased connectivity in more dorsal regions were observed (i.e., inferior frontal gyrus and superior portion of angular gyrus) ( 136 – 138 ). Only a small handful of studies have investigated functional connectivity in nfvPPA, and these have documented reduced connectivity within the speech and language network (SLN), which encompasses left inferior frontal, dorsal insular, supplementary motor, and inferior parietal regions, and are responsible for speech and language production ( 119 ). Relative to control samples, nfvPPA patients demonstrate reduced connectivity within this network, but not among regions belonging to the DMN ( 139 ). Research designs employing graph theory to characterize nodes within the SLN report reduced efficiency and number of nodes, particularly in left parietal regions ( 140 , 141 ). There is also a growing body of literature demonstrating the utility of rs-fMRI in predicting future atrophy in FTLD. Network disruption in svPPA and nfvPPA among key nodes of language networks identified in control samples predict longitudinal grey matter thinning in those regions in respective patient groups ( 33 , 140 ), suggesting that neurodegeneration may propagate along functional pathways in large-scale networks (see figure 5 ). Building on this work, Brown, Deng ( 142 ) demonstrated that individualized “epicenters” of atrophy at baseline (i.e., atrophied regions whose functional connectivity guides disease spread within a network) in bvFTD (anterior cingulate and frontoinsular cortex) and svPPA (anterior temporal lobe) predicted longitudinal gray matter loss for patients in mild-to-moderate clinical stages. Brain atrophy tends to spread from the epicenter to its neighboring and adjacent functionally connected regions that also exhibit some intermediate atrophy at the baseline MRI. These findings support the possibility for rs-fMRI to be utilized as a marker to make individualized predictions of future gray matter loss FTLD, but this has not yet been fully investigated. The few studies that describe the utility of rs-fMRI to inform differential diagnosis in clinical settings have focused on bvFTD and AD samples. bvFTD is associated with network disruption more specific to frontal and temporal nodes, while studies in AD demonstrate more wide spread global alterations of network connectivity with preferential involvement of posterior regions ( 143 ). This pattern has been demonstrated to distinguish between bvFTD and AD with 92% accuracy ( 124 ). Introducing rs-fMRI to a multimodal solution appears to yield mixed results. One study documented only a small improvement in distinguishing between bvFTD and control participant using a multimodal solution that incorporated morphometric features (i.e. temporal and frontal grey matter volume) and network connectivity between and within frontal, temporal and parietal nodes ( 144 ). In contrast, the combination of rs-fMRI, DTI, and structural MRI was found to provide the strongest diagnostic classification between AD and bvFTD ( 145 ). 3.3 Arterial spin labeling ASL is an MRI sequence that magnetically labels arterial water as an endogenous tracer to quantify cerebral blood flow (CBF). This method offers several advantages over traditional PET/SPECT perfusion methods, as it is less expensive, has shorter acquisition times, and does not require intravenous contrast agents. Despite its promise, only a small handful of studies have utilized ASL techniques to assess CBF in sporadic FTLD. These studies have documented hypoperfusion in frontal lobes and the anterior cingulate cortex in bvFTD (see figure 6 ) ( 62 , 146 , 147 ). svPPA is associated with hypoperfusion in the left temporal lobe and insula, and hyperperfusion in the right superior temporal, inferior parietal, and orbitofrontal cortices. Alterations in CBF adjacent to regions that were atrophied at baseline predict subsequent grey matter loss at follow up ( 148 ), suggesting a role for this modality in predicting future regional cortical degeneration. Evidence to-date suggests that ASL may be useful in differentiating between FTLD and AD patients. Similar to other modalities discussed in this chapter, perfusion between these two patient populations appears to follow an anterior-posterior dissociation; FTLD cases demonstrate frontotemporal hypoperfusion while AD patients exhibit hypoperfusion in parietal regions ( 146 ). One study reported that whole brain ASL accurately classified bvFTD and AD groups with 83% sensitivity and 93% specificity ( 149 ) while another reported 77% sensitivity and 76% specificity in the precuneus ( 147 ). Two studies have suggested that ASL and FDG-PET have equivalent diagnostic utility ( 62 , 149 , 150 ), while another found reduced classification accuracy with ASL relative to FDG-PET ( 151 ). Thus, ASL imaging in FTLD is relatively understudied but merits further investigation to better document its’ clinical value relative to other modalities. 3.4 Tau-PET In 2013, when Brad Dickerson was putting the final touches on editing Hodges’ Frontotemporal Dementia ( 152 ), I was so enthusiastic about the potential of new radioligands for measuring tau in the living human brain that I put our first FTD patient’s scan on the cover of the book. This was a patient with MAPT P301L-related mild stage FTD who had clearly elevated signal in all of the right places. Similar enthusiasm was generated when we saw our first nfvPPA and our first PSP case. Unfortunately, when I presented a summary of our first series of cases at the Human Amyloid Imaging meeting in Miami in 2014 ( 153 ), I also had to reveal that we saw substantially elevated signal in a GRN -related FTD patient and in a svPPA patient, both of whom eventually were confirmed by autopsy not to have FTLD tau pathology, but rather the expected FTLD TDP43 pathology. Looking back at the accrued knowledge from the perspective of the Tau 2020 meeting in Washington DC, where Gil Rabinovici presented a masterful summary of tau pet in the non-Alzheimer dementia spectrum ( 154 ), we have learned a number of specific lessons. First, the current generation of tau pet tracers works generally very well for measuring AD-related paired helical filament tau pathology ( 155 ), and there appears to be weak but topographically appropriate signal in PSP ( 156 ) and CBS likely due to CBD pathology ( 157 ). And in MAPT mutation carriers, signal is more elevated in those with mutations associated with tau aggregation that has conformational shapes more similar to those of AD (e.g., the R406W mutation) ( 158 , 159 ). But there is also consistently elevated signal in svPPA ( 160 – 163 ) and variably elevated signal in GRN -related or C9orf72 -related FTLD, calling into serious question the specificity of binding of the first tracers to tau pathology. Furthermore, autoradiographic studies show little or no binding of as 18 F-Flortaucipir or as 18 F-MK6240 to FTLD tau pathology ( 164 – 168 ). Some of this can be understood with our advancing knowledge of the 3D shape of tau inclusions and other work on the fundamental biology of tau by pioneers including Michele Goedert and Maria Grazia Spillantini and Bernardino Ghetti and colleagues ( 169 – 172 ). Thus, while advances in tau PET imaging over the past 7 years is tremendous and is having a prominent impact on the AD field, its value in FTLD is not yet clear and will require substantial further work which is ongoing ( 173 , 174 ). There also remains an urgent need to develop imaging biomarkers of FTLD TDP-43, and work is ongoing to try to measure glial cell responses that may contribute to FTLD-related neurodegeneration ( 175 ). 4. Conclusions Recent advances in neuroimaging have enabled a more complete understanding of the pathophysiology of FTLD, and have offered improved diagnosis of sporadic clinical syndromes associated with FTLD. Overwhelmingly across all modalities, abnormalities in brain structure and function have been identified predominantly in frontal, temporal, and subcortical areas, with eventual progression posteriorly. At present, grey matter morphometry and glucose metabolism, captured by structural MRI and FDG-PET respectively, appear to have the most robust evidence supporting differential diagnosis in clinical settings. However, multi-modal imaging protocols are gaining traction and may serve to improve diagnostic accuracy and longitudinal monitoring, particularly when including DTI and/or rs-fMRI. Substantial multi-center efforts are underway to identify ideal biomarkers that are sensitive to preclinical stages, track disease progression, and predict underlying pathology, particularly the Genetic Frontotemporal dementia Initiative (GENFI) ( 176 , 177 ) and the Advancing Research and Treatment for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (ARTFL)/Longitudinal Evaluation of Familial Frontotemporal Lobar Dementia Subjects (LEFFTDS) Longitudinal Frontotemporal Lobal Degeneration (ALLFTD) ( 178 )initiatives. While these and many other smaller studies are ongoing, evidence to-date supports the value of a variety of imaging biomarkers in clinical trials aiming to develop novel therapeutics for these devastating diseases.