INTRODUCTION Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia [ 1 ]. While hard to reverse, some studies suggested that exercise, social activity, and diet interventions hold promise for increasing reserve in some mild or early cognitive symptoms of AD [ 2 , 3 ]. However, the progression of AD varies substantially from subject to subject and stage to stage, making it difficult for patients, caregivers, clinicians, and researchers to precisely identify the stage progression or take timely prevention or progression-delaying interventions. Effective disentangling analysis of this high heterogeneity is important for understanding the AD pathophysiology, predicting the AD stage transition, and identifying crucial, stage-specific predictors, thus facilitating personalized treatments to delay the disease towards the goal of precision medicine for AD [ 4 ]. For more than 30 years, it has been observed that the progression rate of AD varies from subject to subject, and the duration of AD has been documented to range from a few years to two decades [ 5 , 6 ]. Many factors, including genetic factors (such as apolipoprotein E4 genotype) [ 7 ], brain atrophy rates [ 8 ], and patterns of brain region atrophy [ 9 ], have been studied concerning the rate of cognitive deterioration in AD patients. In the literature, rapid versus slow progressors of AD have been studied; for example, in [ 10 ], AD patients were followed for 3 years, and those who progressed to the moderate stage were considered to be rapid progressors, while those who remained in the early stage were considered to be slow progressors. In [ 11 , 12 ], the rate of progression was computed based on Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) divided by duration and then categorized subjects as the slow and fast progression groups, respectively. In [ 13 ], neural networks and survival models were combined to indistinguishably analyze any changes in the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) grade corresponding to all patients, without disentangling different AD stages nor AD from other types of dementias. The derived trend is coarse because many studies. It was pointed out that the progression rate of AD is different at different stages [ 14 – 16 ]. Thalhauser and Komarova [ 17 ] used a genetic algorithm-based approach to analyze the AD stage durations and obtained two different types of AD progression. While the results were insightful, it did not analyze the mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or early stages, nor did it perform time-to-event prediction for AD stage transitions. With these limitations, it remains challenging to predict or understand why some individuals did not progress to AD while others would. Although the AD progression at different stages is known to be heterogenous, there are rarely studies on predicting the probabilities of time to conversion to the next stage at the stage-specific and individual level; in particular, there is no work for such a prediction approach based on lifestyle, diets, clinical factors, and comorbidities. Therefore, the quantitative delineation of the heterogeneity and characteristics at different stages of AD remains elusive. To potentially alleviate the heterogeneity and provide an insightful prognosis, in this study, we first used statistical survival techniques to verify the AD transition rates of subjects at different stages of cognitive decline, then we developed a deep learning-based approach to predict the stage-specific probabilities of time to AD conversion for different subjects. Our prediction results were well explained with the identified critical predictors from a large number of variables, such as age, gender, race, genetic factor, and clinical indexes. By describing the AD conversion at different stages with probabilities over time rather than a binary number, we could provide fine-grained time information of conversion at an individual level. To disentangle the progressions of AD-mimic dementias, we exclude similar dementia diseases in our analysis of the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) with patient records between 2005 and 2020, such as the limbic-predominant age-related TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) encephalopathy (LATE), whose clinical symptoms are highly similar to AD [ 18 ]. To our knowledge, this is the first study to develop a deep learning-based approach that could accurately predict the probabilities of fine-grained time-to-conversion event. Firstly, we used Kaplan-Meier (KM) estimation to get the transition curves of different AD stages and calculated Log-rank statistics to test whether the progression rate between different stages is identical. This calculation confirmed the known results about the progression rates and conversion time at the population level, and it underscored the need for a prediction approach at the individual level. Then, we developed an approach based on the DeepSurv model to perform time-to-conversion prediction. The concordance index (CI) and integrated Brier score (IBS) demonstrated that our approach could predict the probability of time to conversion to the next stage with high accuracy. Finally, we demonstrated that our approach was well explained by those important variables used in the DeepSurv model, most of which were also significant in the analysis of variance (ANOVA). MATERIALS AND METHODS We used statistical survival models to confirm the characteristics of major transition periods between stages known in the literature to provide a motivation for our approach, and we predicted the probability of AD conversion time towards next stages during a given period. We defined two variables, transition event and transition time, to describe our approach. The former was defined as the occurrence of a subject’s change from the current stage to the next stage, which was also referred to as conversion; the latter denoted the period from the start time of the current stage to the event occurrence time. The workflow for our deep learning-based stage-stratified approach is illustrated in Fig. 1 . Dataset Our approach of predictive modeling and analysis was established on the large prospective cohort, the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) with subjects’ multiple-visit information between 2005 and 2020, which can be accessed upon request and approval by the data owner. The obtained dataset contains 163,199 records, each with 1,727 variables. These records correspond to one or more visits of 44,864 subjects. Subject categorization rules We used the CDR grades to label the different stages of AD, which were calculated on the basis of a semistructured interview of the subjects and the caregivers (informant) and the clinical judgment of the clinicians [ 19 ]. The CDR grade is 0–3 (see Supplementary Table 7 ). A CDR of 0.5 is usually very mild, and a recent study suggested that it might not be an accurate criterion to specify subjects for MCI [ 20 ]. Therefore, we generally consider CDR = 0 and CDR = 0.5 as one group, i.e., the preclinical stage of AD. To help mitigate heterogeneity of disparate types of dementias, we followed the categorization rules in [ 21 ] to exclude some AD-mimic dementia diseases in NACC, including LATE [ 18 ] and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) [ 22 ]. The former is a TDP-43 proteinopathy characterized by the anatomical distribution of TDP-43 protein disease in the brain, including regions like amygdala, hippocampus, or neocortex. Clinically, LATE mimics AD in syndrome, though AD is characterized by a progressive decline in behavior or language associated with degeneration and dysfunction of the frontal and anterior temporal lobes of the brain. FTLD contains several main subtypes in NACC, such as FTLD-TDP (FTLD with TDP-43-positive inclusions), FTLD-ALS (FTLD with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), FTLD-FUS (FTLD with fused in sarcoma-positive inclusions), FTLD-UPS (FTLD with fused in sarcoma-positive inclusions), and FTLD-NOS (FTLD not otherwise specified, which includes dementia lacking distinctive histology and FTLD with no inclusions detected by tau, TDP-43, or ubiquitin/p62 IHC). We excluded the above types of dementias from our analysis and modeling. Preprocessing Based on CDR grades, for the stage-stratified transitions, we focused on the following six scenarios: { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 1 } ⇝ 2 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 , 3 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } { 0 , 0.5 , 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 , 3 } For the data in different scenarios, we further performed data cleaning to remove variables that were repeatedly defined, for example, VISITYR (denoting visit year, which is redundant since there are variables BIRTHYR and NACCAGE to provide each subjects year of birth and age at visit); variables apparently not relevant to the goal of our analysis, for instance, NACCADC (Alzheimer’s Disease Center at which a subject was seen) and FORMVER (the form version number used for information of questionnaires); variables not defined (which have NaN values or show “Not available”). In this study we did not perform data imputation but directly deleted the variables with missing values, the main consideration was that most of the missing variables in NACC data were categorical, and imputing categorical variables could cause bias or large error fluctuations [ 23 ]; for more details, see the Supplementary Material . Also, we deleted the variables about AD-related dementia, such as those beginning with prefixes FTD and LB regarding frontotemporal dementia and Lewy body disease-related clinical variables. The diseases such as FTD and LB are not AD but often appear similar to AD in clinical syndromes; thus, they might form disturbances to the disease of interest (AD) in our current analysis. We excluded the patients with these diseases but no AD (and thus the corresponding variables) to reduce potential heterogeneity in dementia types. After the data preprocessing, we got 245 variables, including age (e.g., NACCAGE and NACCAGEB), behavior variables (e.g., BEDEP and BEVHALL), apolipoprotein E genotype variable (NACCAPOE), and two auxiliary variables we have introduced, transition time and transition event. For the description of these indexes, see Supplementary Table 6 and Supplementary Excel file . Subject statistics For the groups in different scenarios, we show the basic subject statistic information for different transitions in Fig. 2 . Here, { α } ↛ { β } { α } → { β } Supplementary Table 1 . The histogram of visit counts (counts versus the number of visits) for different stratified stages are shown in Supplementary Figure 1 . Models/Methods used in our analysis In this study, the KM curve, Log-rank test, and DeepSurv were used for our analysis. The KM and Log-rank test are two typical methods for univariate survival analysis, describing survival in terms of one factor but ignoring the impact of the other variables. KM estimator is a non parametric statistic used to estimate the survival function from censored data; the Log-rank test is a hypothesis test about whether the survival distributions of time-independent groups are identical. In our analyses, we imported the functions lifelines.KaplanMeierFitter() and lifelines.statistics.logrank_test() for our calculation. The Cox proportional hazard (CPH) model is a standard semi-parametric regression model widely used in epidemiological studies and clinical trials [ 24 ] to assess survival time based on risk variables. In our initial analysis and modeling, we found that CPH did not converge well on the data in Table 3 . One reason might be the potentially complex, nonlinear relationships between variables and AD stage-stratified transitions. Thus, in this study, we employed DeepSurv for modeling purposes, which is a recent deep learning-based extension for the CPH model and could surpass classical survival models [ 25 ]. In our analysis, we used the function pysurvival.models.semi_parametric.NonLinearCox PHModel() for our calculation and prediction. Additionally, we imported the function scipy.stats.f_oneway() for the analysis of variance (ANOVA) to corroborate the significance of identified variables. Machine learning settings We set the maximum number of epochs to be 2,000. We initialized the weights of the layers with the Xavier normal distribution-based initializer [ 26 ]. We adopted the Adam optimizer [ 27 ] with an initialized learning rate of 0.0001. We constructed the DeepSurv with one 150-neuron hidden layer, wherein Bent identity was used as the activation function. For the hyper-parameter setting, we adopted the default settings described in the open-source python packages Lifelines [ 28 ] and PySurvival [ 29 ]. For the stage-stratified groups in all scenarios, we randomly split them into training and test sets by a ratio of 80:20; the results were averaged over 5 runs of 5 different random splits, and the uncertainties were represented 95% confidence intervals computed with 1,000 bootstrapped samples [ 30 ]. All computations were implemented with Python 3.7.8 and JupyterLab 3.2.9. Evaluation metrics Two standard metrics were adopted for evaluating the performance of our stage-stratified conversion prediction: 1) CI [ 31 ] is widely used to evaluate the ability of survival models to rank individuals by their time-to-event risk predictions. The range of CI values is in [0, 1], and the larger the CI value, the better the performance. 2) IBS [ 32 ] extends the Brier score to right-censored data for evaluating the accuracy of an estimated survival function at time t. The IBS value is nonnegative, and the smaller the value, the better the performance. In our predictive modeling, we imported functions pysurvival.utils.metrics.concordance _index() and pysurvival.utils.display.integrated_brier _score() for calculating CI and IBS. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. RESULTS Kaplan-Meier estimation and Log-rank test to confirm existing knowledge about progression rates on NACC (2005–2020) We used the KM method to estimate the survival functions from different scenarios. We compared the progression rates pairwise between different stages in Fig. 3 . Then, we utilized the Log-rank test to calculate their p -values, as given in Table 1 . For more results, see Supplementary Figure 2 and Supplementary Table 2 . Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure 2 suggest that, for { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 , 3 } { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 0 , 0.5 , 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 , 3 } { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } { 0 , 0.5 , 1 } ⇝ { 2 } Table 1 , it is evident that the differences for { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 , 3 } { 0 , 0.5 , 1 } ⇝ { 2 } vs . { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } 15 , 33 ] that the cognitive deterioration progresses more rapidly in mid-level AD stage than in preclinical AD stage. Also, Fig.3 and Supplementary Figure 2 show that, before 3,000 days, the progression rate of { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } Table 1 and Supplementary Table 2 indicate that their differences are both significant. Judging from the above-analysis, for a given period between 1,000 and 3,000 days, { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } Having confirmed with existing results about the AD progression rates, to have a simplified quantification of the progression rates at the population level, we performed quadratic polynomial fitting of each estimated function in Supplementary Table 3 . After being clipped to [0,1], the resulting polynomial function values can be used as the probabilities of staying in the current stage over time in a scenario of interest. The bigger the probability value the smaller the conversion rate, and vice versa, e.g., for a given sequence of time points [500, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, 3000, 3500], by our fitted mathematical models, we can respectively calculate the probability of staying in the current stage for { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } Fig. 3 (c) : before 2,000 days, { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } { 1 } ⇝ { 3 } { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } Machine learning-based time-to-conversion prediction The KM curves and Log-rank test are population-level methods for assessing the progression rates. Towards individualized prevention and intervention, there is an unmet need for stage-specific prediction at the individual level. To this end, we developed an approach based on a deep learning model, DeepSurv, to make probabilistic time-to-conversion prediction. The results of prediction performance in CI and IBS are presented in Table 2 on the cleaned and pre-processed NACC data in Table 3 . To illustrate the convergence of model training, we plot the loss functions in Supplementary Figure 3 . The training of the model can be seen to converge well for different stage stratifications. Our approach can accurately predict how soon the disease state would convert to the next stage within a given period for the participants in NACC. Specifically, the probability of a subject converting from the preclinical AD stage to the early AD stage, i.e., { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } 2 , 3 ] suggested, lifestyle interventions, such as exercise, social activity, and diet, might help slow down the progression of certain cognitive symptoms of the preclinical or early AD. Therefore, our prediction for the progression from the preclinical stage to early stage of AD at the individual level has medical implications. It can potentially help clinicians and researchers identify the subjects years before the incidence of early AD, thus facilitating early prevention or timely intervention to slow down the progression of AD. Further, we visually compare the predicted survival probabilities with our DeepSurv-based approach and the actual time when the transition event occurred. We present the predicted survival probabilities for 5 randomly selected subjects in the test set in Fig. 4 . The visual comparison indicates that our approach produced good predictive modeling for almost all scenarios. Also, we provide the predicted survival probabilities for more subjects in Supplementary Figure4 . It is observed that compared to other scenarios, the conversion occurrence of most subjects for { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } Explainability of the prediction results by our approach We performed post-processing of the learned weight matrix by the DeepSurv method to obtain feature ranking and selection to facilitate the interpretation of the prediction results. In particular, we computed the L1,2 norm of the weight matrix in the first layer to score the importance of input variables for each of the different scenarios. We identified the top 10 variables shown in Supplementary Figure 5 . Further, we used ANOVA to validate the significance of the top 3 variables for each scenario, see Supplementary Table 5 . It is observed that the top 1 variable is related to the age of subjects, and ANOVA results are essentially consistent with the DeepSurv-based approach, which show statistical significance for all scenarios except { 1 } ⇝ { 2 } Age (NACCAGEB and NACCAGE) was the single topmost predictor for the risk of conversion at all stages. Both NACCAGEB and NACCAGE were among the top 2 or 3 predictors in most scenarios. In particular, the variable NACCAGEB was the top one in all scenarios except for { 0 , 0.5 } ⇝ { 1 } Besides age, vascular pathology was the most important predictor of the conversion risk from the preclinical state ( { 0 , 0.5 } Race was among the top 10 important predictors for predicting the conversion from the preclinical stage to the early AD stage, along with other predictors related to age, vascular pathology, and signs or pathologies linked with dementias such as those related to alcohol (ALCDEM), FTD-Tau subtypes (NPFTDT5), reasons coming to NACC Centers (NACCREAS), and certain degrees of observed impairment (NACCIDEM, IMPNOMCI). Increasing evidence has been found about the role of race in the early AD stage, e.g., [ 34 , 35 ]. For conversions to more advanced stages of AD (CDR=2, 3), the impairment of community affairs (COMMUN), home and hobby (HOMEHOBB), cognitive functions (COGJUDG, COGMODE, NACCCOGF, JUDGMENT, ORIENT), behaviors (BEAPATHY), reported impairment (DECSUB, DECIN), and other types of comorbid dementias (NACCIDEM and NACCOTHP: note that NACCIDEM was determined at the initial visit and did not change in the follow-ups), such as those affected by alcohol (ALCDEM), Lewy Body dementia (NACCLBDS), frontal temporal dementia-Tau subtypes (NPFTDT5), primary progressive aphasia (NACCPPA), were among the top 10 predictors. Somewhat surprisingly, APOE genotype was not among the top 10 predictors for predicting the risks of either incidence or conversion. Notably, personal care (PERSCARE, in scenario { 1 } ⇝ { 2 , 3 } { 2 } ⇝ { 3 } 36 , 37 ]. The importance of the personal care predictor calls for increased attention to it to slow down the progression from early AD to full-scaled AD. Taken together, many of the identified top predictors are consistent with the findings of the literature, while several, such as vascular pathology, personal care, and handedness, are newly found to be associated only with specific AD stages by this study. DISCUSSION We showed the results of KM estimation and Log-rank test only to confirm on the (almost) most up-to-date NACC data (2005–2020) existing knowledge about the heterogeneity in cognitive decline rate in AD patients in the literature; it was not intended to compare them with the results of DeepSurv. As pointed out previously, our approach was mainly based on a recent deep learning model, DeepSurv, to predict the probabilities of conversion time specific to AD stages and personalized to each new individual (not in the training set). It can provide the ranking and weights of the predictors for facilitating to explain how our approach produced the prediction results. First, we confirmed the known results that the AD progression rates at the early and mid-level stages are more rapid than at the preclinical stage; in particular, the progression rate of the early stage (CDR = 1) to the mid-level stage (CDR = 2) is the fastest. Our approach could predict the probabilities of the time to convert to next stages for each individual with good accuracy: for each of the different stages, the CI of our method was at least 86% and the IBS was less than 0.1. Moreover, we identified the top 10 important variables for each disease conversion scenario, which are clinically and functionally meaningful; e.g., for all the scenarios, the top variable is about the age of the subjects in NACC. These different sets of top variables could help explain the prediction results by our DeepSurv-based approach. In our study, several NACC variables are correlated with CDR, for example, JUDGMENT and HOMEHOBB (for more details, see Supplementary Table 6 ). These variables were included in our analysis since we thought these variables were clinically easy to measure and potentially helpful to use to serve as observable indicators of the time-to-conversion of AD. While recent inspiring work such as [ 38 ], suggested not using clinical diagnostic information to assess AD risk scores, in the literature clinical diagnostic variables were generally included for predictive analysis [ 39 , 40 ]. One reason might be that these variables are relatively easy to observe and obtain compared to the complex underlying (latent) disease progression process. Thus, in this study, we retained several easily measurable clinical diagnostic variables in our DeepSurv-based analysis. They may provide convenient clinical observations for the prediction of individualized conversions of AD. Potential utility We summarize the potential utility of our approach in clinical settings as follows: The proposed new approach may mitigate or have potential to remedy the drawback of the current diagnostic deficiency. Several diagnostic techniques and biomarkers for AD have been established to be applied in clinical settings, particularly to detect AD in living individuals. For example, amyloid-β (Aβ) positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, tau PET imaging, or measurements in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can detect the presence of Aβ plaques or tau tangles in vivo . Moreover, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can detect structural anomalies due to neurodegeneration, e.g., the loss of hippocampal volume and the localized thinning of cortical gray matter. These techniques even allow us to identify prodromal or preclinical illnesses in patients many years before their actual AD onsets. Despite these techniques tremendous success, there is currently no established biomarker that robustly predicts or correlates with clinical decline. In particular, some subjects have Aβ plaques or tau tangles in their brains but did not develop observable clinical declines. It is still an open question of whether biomarkers can be more closely tied to cognitive functions or serve as surrogate endpoints in dementia treatment trials [ 41 – 43 ]. We believe that machine learning may help provide a viable way to alleviate the weakness of imaging or fluid biomarkers, owing to its strong ability for robust prediction based on big data and advanced algorithms. However, the design of a potential machine learning approach for predicting the clinical decline must carefully consider the high heterogeneity of dementia in different stages. Therefore, we propose this machine/deep learning-based approach to predict the cognitive decline at a specific stage for a specific individual. In clinical settings, once a subject is diagnosed with prodromal, or preclinical, or clinical AD by using current or future advanced biomarker techniques and the cognitive decline stage is determined with clinical-pathological measures such as the CDR, our algorithm can then be applied to predict the cognitive declines over time tailored to this specific individual. Therefore, our approach can be regarded as an organic augmentation of the current biomarker techniques, with the potential for personalized prevention, treatment, and care for AD patients. The proposed approach is expected to have a general utility on other problems. It can be easily transferred to other datasets about AD or other diseases, for example, Parkinson’s disease, cancer, or other diseases with multiple stages in cognitive function or motion system decline. In this study, we obtained the right-censored data for our analysis by defining two variables, transition time and transition event, according to the CDR grades in one or more visits of subjects. If the subject showed no change in the starting CDR grade during all visits in a studying scenario, we considered that the subjects data were right-censored. Then, we used the KM estimation to get the transition curves of different AD stages. We also calculated the Log-rank statistics to test whether the progression rates in different stages were identical. We used DeepSurv to perform time-to-conversion prediction. The KM, Log-rank, and DeepSurv are used to handle censored data. Thus, it is clear that applying the proposed approach in this study requires only that the data is right-censored. Therefore, our approach can be readily generalized or transferred to other diseases. Also, it is noted that, AD is currently an irreversible devastating disease even with the state-of-the-art treatment or interventions. Thus, in this study, we defined conversion as a direct transition from a lighter to a more severe cognitive stage. We did not consider the transitions in the reverse direction (i.e., from a more severe to a lighter stage) to be valid in our study. A tiny fraction of patients had “reversed transitions” in the NACC data; for them, we treated their “improved cognitive stage” as measuring noise and regarded the stage as unchanged. For these patients and those whose stage did not change during the study period, we considered their conversion time right-censored. Strengths and limitations The effectiveness of our approach was rigorously verified with cross validation and statistical testing in different metrics. However, our approach still has several limitations, which will be discussed below. Our individualized prediction approach is established on the dataset of NACC by excluding AD-mimics such as LATE and FTLD. It would be desirable to confirm the effectiveness on an independent data set of a large prospective cohort study. Such a large cohort is needed because we need to have a reasonable sample size after stratifying the cohort according to the stages and excluding the subjects with AD mimics. It is necessary to exclude the AD mimics because, although having similar clinical features, they can have considerably different conversion and progression rates from AD at a specific stage. Therefore, it is not easy to obtain another large cohort like NACC. On the other hand, we would like to point out that this limitation is not a severe one because we have performed multi-fold cross validations to ensure a good generalization to new data and, also, statistical analysis to corroborate the effectiveness of the models and performance. While our approach demonstrated good performance in CI and IBS, as given in Table 2 , it still had prediction inaccuracies, as indicated by the gap for average CI value to 1 or average IBS to 0 when compared to the actual conversion time. In the modeling, we used a time point represented by a NACC center visit as the conversion time when the CDR rating changed from the starting stage in a specific scenario for a subject. However, in reality, the conversion usually happens gradually and thus is not switch-like. Therefore, the conversion time represented by a specific visit time is only an approximation to the earliest noticeable conversion time. Furthermore, providing the probabilities of conversion overtime, as our approach did in this paper, appears more appropriate than simply predicting a single time point to represent the conversion. The predictor ranking and weights are informative; however, it is worth pointing out that many top predictors selected by our current post-processing procedure had significant correlations, e.g., the variables about age (such as NACCAGE and NACCAGEB). It is often necessary to tip the balance between the correlations and predictability of the selected variables. How to achieve such a balance is beyond the scope of this current paper and warrants to be further studied in the future. Conclusion In this study, after (re-)confirming the known population-level results about progression rates, we developed a stage-stratified approach by leveraging machine learning to probabilistically predict the time course of AD stage-specific conversion for different individuals. Our study has the potential to provide individualized prediction for future disease time courses of conversions years before their actual occurrence, thus helping facilitate early prevention and intervention to slow down the disease progression. Supplementary Material