Introduction The association between aortic arch atherosclerosis (AAAthero) and stroke is increasingly recognized.[ 1 2 ] Literature reports a strong association between arch atherosclerosis and the risk of stroke, such that significant aortic plaques are seen in up to 14% of patients with a history of stroke and peripheral embolization.[ 3 4 ] Epidemiological studies have established AAAthero as a strong and independent risk factor for stroke, especially in patients with unclear etiology of stroke (i.e., cryptogenic stroke).[ 4 5 ] This association is more robust with the increasing severity of AAAthero disease.[ 4 6 ] The current aortic plaque classification classifies plaques based on size and does not take the thickness of the wall into account. It classifies aortic plaques into simple and complex, with complex aortic plaques having a thickness ≥4 mm with ulceration.[ 7 ] More severe diseases represent plaques with complex morphology, especially ulceration, protruding elements, and mobile elements.[ 4 6 8 9 10 11 ] Conventionally, atherosclerotic lesions in the arch were identified using transesophageal echocardiography (TEE); however, TEE has some limitations due to its invasive nature and constrained availability.[ 12 ] Nowadays, computed tomography angiography (CTA) is routinely used to evaluate patients with ischemic stroke. Arch-to-vertex CTA allows imaging of the aortic arch and simultaneously enables imaging of craniocervical vasculature in a single study. Thus, arch-to-vertex CTA might provide a noninvasive alternative to TEE. However, the sensitivity and specificity of arch disease assessment on routinely acquired CTA against “gold standard” TEE are unclear. With this background, we aimed to develop a novel CTA-based grading system informed by a systematic review to quantify the severity of aortic arch disease and compare the detection of AAAthero on routinely acquired arch-to-vertex CTA against TEE among patients with cryptogenic ischemic stroke. Methods To formulate a CTA-based grading system, we conducted a systematic literature review and used it in the derivation cohort at Foothills Medical Center, Calgary. Furthermore, we applied the computed tomography (CT)-based arch atherosclerosis grading system to detect aortic arc atherosclerosis in a different cohort from a tertiary care hospital in India. In cryptogenic ischemic stroke patients, we compared the detection of AAAthero on routinely acquired arch-to-vertex CTA versus TEE in the derivation cohort. Systematic review We performed a systematic review of published studies that compared arch-to-vertex CTA with TEE to identify any existing AAAthero grading in patients with stroke/ Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA). The systematic review conformed to the recommendations of the Preferred Reporting Items of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement.[ 13 ] A Medline/PubMed database search was performed on October 22, 2023, combining cryptogenic stroke and CTA themes. Details of the search strategy are provided in the online Supplementary; there were no language restrictions. Two raters (RJS, SB, or AW) independently screened the title/abstract of retrieved records for the relevant studies. Criteria for inclusion of a study were: 1. patient population of stroke and/or TIA; 2. patient evaluation by both arch-to-vertex CTA and TEE; and 3. data on sensitivity and specificity of CTA compared to TEE. Furthermore, we hand-searched the bibliography of each article included to find additional studies. We excluded studies with single case reports or small case series (n < 5), reviews, and conference proceedings. As our primary interest was to compare the yield of arch-to-vertex CTA acquired during routine evaluation of stroke patients, we excluded studies that compared TEE with CTA performed to assess only thoracic aorta or studies that used technique modifications, for example, dual-source CT, as these are not part of routine stroke protocol. Full texts of the selected articles were retrieved, and data were extracted independently by the two raters and entered into predesigned proforma. Finally, the risk of bias in the included studies was assessed using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 tool.[ 14 ] Disagreement regarding study inclusion, data extraction, and bias assessment was resolved by discussion and consensus. Derivation cohort Patient population We built a derivation cohort by retrospectively including adult patients (≥18 years) with cryptogenic stroke who underwent both arch-to-vertex CTA and TEE during the index stroke admission at Foothills Medical Center over 24 consecutive months. The standard workup for stroke was done in all patients. Besides, TEE was performed to evaluate the subset of patients in whom TTE was negative and cardiac or aortic source of embolism was suspected. Stroke mechanism was considered cryptogenic if patients had a non-lacunar ischemic stroke without carotid or intracranial stenosis or a high-risk cardiac condition and no other definite etiology using Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) criteria.[ 15 ] The Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the University of Calgary approved this study, and a waiver of consent was obtained. CTA protocol Arch-to-vertex CTA acquired on a 64-slice CT scanner (GE Medical Systems) was obtained after a single bolus intravenous contrast injection of 70–90 mL of iohexol (Omnipaque 350, GE Healthcare) in the antecubital vein at a rate of 5 mL/sec. Imaging was auto-triggered by the appearance of contrast material in the ascending aorta, and a scan was performed from the aortic arch to the vertex with 0.625 mm slice thickness. Multiplanar volume-reformatted images of 3.0 mm slice thickness were generated in axial, sagittal, and coronal planes. Independent neuroradiologists graded arch atherosclerosis on a 5-point scale [ Figure 1 and Table 1 ]. All visualized segments of the arch – ascending, transverse, and descending – were assessed for atherosclerosis, and the largest of the plaque was used to define the grade of atherosclerosis. The measurement of plaque thickness was made on CTA axial source images using the electronic ruler available on the Picture Archiving and Communication System workstation. Neuroradiologists reading CTA were blinded to TEE results. Figure 1 Grading of arch atherosclerosis using CT angiography based on our newly developed Calgary CT Arch atherosclerosis Grading: (a) grade 1: 5–10 mm of aortic wall thickness (white line); (b) grade 2: >10 mm single/multiple areas of linear atherosclerosis with smooth surface (white thick arrow); (c) grade 3: >10 mm single/multiple areas with irregular surface/ulceration (white long arrow); (d) grade 4: >10 mm single/multiple complex protruding plaques with the neck (white arrowhead). CT: computed tomography Table 1 Comparison of TEE and CTA grading systems for aortic atherosclerosis severity Severity description TEE CTA Grades a Definition a Grades (Calgary CT Arch scoring) Definition Mild disease Grade 1 Aortic wall minimal intimal thickening Grade 0 Aortic wall thickness <5 mm Grade 2 Extensive aortic wall intimal thickening Grade 1 5–10 mm of aortic wall thickness Moderate disease Grade 3 Sessile atheroma protruding less than 5 mm Grade 2 >10 mm single/multiple areas of linear atheroma with smooth surface (large smooth plaque) Grade 4 Sessile atheroma protruding at least 5 mm into the aortic lumen Grade 3 >10 mm single/multiple areas with irregular surface/ulceration (large, ulcerated plaques) Severe or advanced disease Grade 5 Mobile protruding atheroma Grade 4 >10 mm single/multiple complex protruding plaques with the neck (large, pedunculated lesions) CT: computed tomography, CTA: computed tomography angiography, TEE: transesophageal echocardiogram, a: modified by Katz et al[ 18 ] Transesophageal echocardiography All TEE examinations met Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Society of Echocardiography guidelines.[ 16 17 ] TEE was performed using an ultrasound system (Philips-IE33) with a 1.6–3.2 MHz phased array transducer and a 2–6 MHz TEE probe. The ascending aorta was visualized in the transverse and longitudinal planes. Posterior rotation of the TEE probe with advancement into the distal esophagus allowed analysis of the descending thoracic aorta. Aortic arch grading on TEE was completed by an independent cardiologist blinded to CTA findings, who analyzed the videotapes of the procedure and graded atherosclerosis on a 5-point scale (mild disease- Grade 1–2 vs. moderate to severe disease- Grade 3–5) modified from Katz et al.[ 18 ] [ Table 1 ]. Similar to CTA, the largest plaque defined the grade of atherosclerosis. The thickness of the plaque was measured by freezing the on-screen image and using the inbuilt digital calipers in the machine. We applied Computerized Tomography Arch atherosclerosis Scoring (CTAS) on a cohort of 229 cryptogenic stroke patients, aged >18 years, with cryptogenic ischemic stroke or TIA, presenting to a comprehensive stroke center in Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, India.[ 7 ] All patients in the validation set underwent a CTA, and AAAthero was categorized according to the CT arch classification system for atherosclerotic plaques (grade 0–4). Aortic plaques were assessed across all grades using our newly developed Calgary CT Arch atherosclerosis Grading system. Statistical analysis Categorical variables are reported as numbers and percentages, while continuous variables are reported as median and interquartile range. The prevalence of arch atherosclerosis and its grades on arch-to-vertex CTA was compared to its prevalence and grades on TEE. We determined the sensitivity and specificity of arch-to-vertex CTA for detecting arch atherosclerosis, considering TEE as the gold standard. We also compared the sensitivity and specificity of arch-to-vertex CTA to detect TEE-defined mild disease (Grade 1–2) versus moderate to severe disease (Grade 3–5). Interval approximates (95% confidence interval [CI]) were calculated using the asymptomatic method (Wald) based on a normal approximation. All analyses were performed using the statistical software package Statistical Package for the Social Sciences for Windows (version 22.0.0; IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). Results Systematic review A literature search [ Supplementary Figure 1 , PRISMA flow diagram] revealed only three additional studies that compared the yield of arch-to-vertex CTA to TEE for diagnosing arch atherosclerosis among patients with stroke/TIA. The characteristics of the included studies are presented in Table 2 .[ 19 20 21 ] The sensitivity of CTA for detecting any grade of arch atherosclerosis ranged between 53% and 76%, and its specificity ranged between 89% and 95%. In contrast, CTA sensitivity ranged between 23.3% and 100% for detecting moderate to severe arch atherosclerosis, and its specificity between 92.6% and 100%. The risk of bias in the included studies is presented in Supplementary Table 1 , and it was low overall. Table 2 Characteristics of included studies in the systematic literature review Study Design, population N Prevalence of arch atherosclerosis (%) Grading criteria For any arch atherosclerosis For moderate to severe disease a Outcome Sensitivity of CTA Specificity of CTA Sensitivity of CTA Specificity of CTA Barazangi et al., 2011[ 19 ] Retrospective, patients who underwent TEE and CTA 494 NA Grade 1, AA atheroma, 4 mm thick; grade 2, atheroma ≥4 mm but not encroaching on the AA lumen; grade 3, atheroma ≥4 mm and encroaching on the AA lumen; and grade 4, atheroma ≥4 mm with a mobile element seen on TEE or pedunculated and/or with associated thrombus seen on CTA 53% 89% 23% 99% CTA has a high negative predictive value for AA atheromas Chatzikonstantinou et al., 2012[ 20 ] Prospective, cryptogenic stroke 64 CTA vs TEE 43/64 vs 21/64 Grade 1, mild, small plaques; grade 1a or 2a, non-calcified plaques; grade 1b or 2b calcified on segmental basis; grade 2, severe, frequent, large plaques NA NA NA NA CTA detects plaques frequently compared to TEE Asif et al., 2022[ 21 ] Prospective, non-consecutive stroke patients 63 CTA vs TEE: 25/31 vs 15/31 NA NA NA NA NA TEE was beneficial to detect mobile plaque debris (8/31) and thrombi (TEE: 1/31 vs CTA: 0/31, P =1.0). eTable 1 Quality assessment of included studies Studies Patient selection Index test Reference standard Flow and timing Barazangi 2011 Low Low Low Low Chatzikonstantinou 2012 Low Low Low Low Asif 2022 Low Low Unclear Unclear Calgary CT Arch atherosclerosis Grading Based on systematic literature review findings, we classified AAAthero into five grades on CTA. As CTA cannot distinguish intima–media, we used entire aortic wall thickness, and any thickness >5 mm was considered significant. Three neurologists (RJS, SB, or AW) evaluated and classified arch atherosclerosis. Grade 0 implied patients with aortic wall thickness <5 mm. Grade 1 was defined as 5–10 mm of aortic wall thickness. Grade 2 was described as >10 mm single/multiple areas of linear atherosclerosis with a smooth surface (i.e., large, smooth plaque), and Grade 3 was defined as >10 mm single/multiple areas with irregular surface/ulceration (i.e., large, ulcerated plaques). Grade 4 was defined as >10 mm single/multiple complex protruding plaques with or without superimposed thrombus with a neck [ Table 1 ]. Derivation study A total of 141 patients with cryptogenic ischemic stroke (median age: 59 years; 79% male) with both CTA and TEE examinations met our inclusion criteria. Arch atherosclerosis was demonstrable among 29 patients (20.6%) on TEE and 28 patients (19.9%) on CTA. Seven patients (7/29, 24.1%) had arch atherosclerosis detected on TEE and had normal CTA; six patients (21.4%) had plaques on CTA, while their TEE was reported to be normal. Arch atherosclerosis was visualized in 35 patients (24.8%) on either TEE or CTA, and the remaining 106 (75.2%) patients had no arch atherosclerosis seen on either modality. Among patients with arch atherosclerosis, moderate to severe disease was observed in 10 patients (34.5%) on TEE and 14 patients (50%) on CTA [ Table 3 ]. Table 3 Comparison of aortic disease grades in patients: TEE versus CTA TEE grade Number of patients (%) CTA grade Number of patients (%) Grade 1 7 (24.1) Grade 0 113 (80.1) Grade 2 12 (41.4) Grade 1 14 (50) Grade 3 3 (10.3) Grade 2 6 (21.4) Grade 4 4 (13.8) Grade 3 5 (17.9) Grade 5 3 (10.3) Grade 4 3 (10.7) CTA: computed tomography angiography, TEE: transesophageal echocardiogram Of 29 patients with TEE-demonstrable arch atherosclerosis, CTA demonstrated abnormalities in 22 patients (76%). All seven patients with abnormal TEE and normal CTA (false negative) had TEE-defined mild atherosclerosis (grade 1 atherosclerosis in five patients [71%] and grade 2 in two patients [29%]). In contrast, all patients with moderate to severe arch atherosclerosis on TEE had abnormal CTA. Figure 1 demonstrates the distribution of TEE-defined arch atherosclerosis severity grades and the corresponding number of patients with abnormal (any atherosclerosis) CTA. Among six patients with arch atherosclerosis visible on CTA and normal TEE reports, plaques were located in the transverse segment of the aortic arch, and none of the plaques located on ascending or descending segments of the arch were missed by TEE. Overall, CTA’s sensitivity to detect AAAthero (any grade) was 76% (95% CI: 0.56–0.88) and specificity was 95% (95% CI: 0.88–0.97) compared to TEE. The sensitivity of CTA to detect atherosclerosis in TEE-defined moderate to severe arch disease was 100%, with 100% specificity. Validation study We validated the disease prevalence and prognostic ability of CTAS on a cohort of 229 patients, aged ≥18 years, with cryptogenic ischemic stroke or TIA, presenting to a comprehensive stroke center in Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, India. All patients in the validation set underwent a CTA, and aortic arch atheroma were categorized as per the Calgary CT Arch atherosclerosis Grading system. The presence of significant aortic plaques and clinical outcomes was assessed. The clinical outcomes were defined as stroke, TIA, and vascular death taken together and assessed at 1-year post-index stroke/TIA. Of the 229 cryptogenic stroke patients, 36 (15.7%) had moderate to severe or significant disease (grade 2, 3, and 4). Of the 229 cryptogenic stroke patients, 36 (15.7%) had moderate to severe or significant disease (grade 2, 3, and 4) [ Table 4 ]. The clinical outcomes and results of this study have been published elsewhere.[ 7 ] Table 4 CTA grading and patient distribution across derivation and validation cohorts Derivation cohort CTA grade Number of patients (%) (n=141) Validation cohort CTA grade Number of patients (%) (n=229) Grade 0 113 (80.1) Grade 0 138 (60.2) Grade 1 14 (50) Grade 1 55 (24.1) Grade 2 6 (21.4) Grade 2 7 (3.2) Grade 3 5 (17.9) Grade 3 10 (4.3) Grade 4 3 (10.7) Grade 4 19 (8.2) CTA: computed tomography angiography Discussion The present study suggests the comparative accuracy of arch-to-vertex CTA as a potential alternative to TEE for diagnosing AAAthero. The two modalities were equivalent in the presence of moderate to severe arch disease, which was seen in over one-third of our patients. Moderate to severe arch diseases are clinically more relevant for stroke causation than a mild disease. The association between stroke and arch atherosclerosis is stronger among patients with complex plaques, which are present in more advanced diseases.[ 6 8 10 22 23 ] Transcranial Doppler studies have shown higher emboli count among patients with cryptogenic stroke and larger plaques.[ 24 ] More severe arch disease is also associated with higher emboli to the brain during cardiac and carotid procedures, which could result in new strokes.[ 18 25 ] Thus, detection of moderate to severe arch atherosclerosis is clinically more relevant, and both CTA and TEE were found to perform equally well in detecting clinically significant arch disease in our data. CTA was better in diagnosing atherosclerotic lesions involving the transverse segment of the aortic arch, the segment where plaques are more likely to be embolized to the brain than the lesions in the distal aorta. TEE failed to detect one in seven plaques located on the transverse segment of the arch in our study. The presence of air in the trachea and left bronchus limits the evaluation of this region of the arch. Some authors have reported technical modifications in TEE to visualize the transverse segment of the arch better, “the blind spot.”[ 26 27 28 ] However, these techniques have not been validated. In contrast, mild abnormalities can be missed on CTA, as TEE can detect mild intimal changes seen in grade 1 and 2 disease. CTA could demonstrate an abnormality in only 12 of 19 patients (63.2%) with mild disease. This was not well reported in previous studies comparing the two modalities, which modified the TEE grading scheme to match CTA grading.[ 19 ] However, as noted in the present study, it is important to recognize an intermodality difference in the arch grading system and the superiority of TEE to detect intima–media change in mild disease. Our study is relevant in the current context when arch-to-vertex CTA has become a standard modality to evaluate patients with acute stroke/TIA.[ 29 ] Arch-to-vertex CTA can replace TEE to diagnose clinically relevant arch atherosclerosis when TEE is either not available or feasible and thus not performed. CTA also has the potential advantages of being rapid and noninvasive, and allows simultaneous assessment of cervical and intracranial vasculature. However, it is important to recognize the technical limitations of routine arch-to-vertex CTA for arch assessment. The first consideration when using CTA for arch assessment is to start acquisition sufficiently low to capture the entire aortic arch; inadequate coverage will lead to false-negative results and will lower the sensitivity of CTA. Second, pulsation artifacts are frequently seen in non-gated CTA studies.[ 30 ] These are typically performed to evaluate stroke in acute settings and can impair the wall or plaque thickness assessment. It is important to be aware of this to identify and report arch plaques and their dimensions correctly. Misinterpreting aortic wall thickening with pulsation artifacts could falsely lower/increase CTA sensitivity. Given the paucity of AAAthero classification, this study will help further objectify and discreetly grade AAAthero. Furthermore, our grading criteria can be validated on different ethnic groups globally. We believe our work will help in prognostication and pave the way to develop robust treatment strategies for managing AAAthero. This study has some limitations. We used retrospective data for analysis. A prospective design with consecutive patient enrollment would provide more accurate estimates of the prevalence of arch atherosclerosis among patients with cryptogenic stroke. However, we validated the current CTA grading scheme in an external cohort, which emphasizes its generalizability. We do not report the clinical outcomes in the derivation cohort due to the lack of follow-up data, and this is another limitation of our study. This is a pilot study with a smaller sample size; one must be cautious in interpreting the study findings. The clinical outcomes for the application cohort have been published elsewhere, and since this study was done on a different population, the outcomes cannot be generalized.[ 7 ] Interobserver agreement in detecting AAAthero on CTA needs to be tested as previous studies showed a modest correlation between TEE and CTA.[ 31 ] Despite these limitations, our study supports arch-to-vertex CTA’s feasibility in assessing arch atherosclerosis. Conclusion In conclusion, routine arch-to-vertex CTA performed during the evaluation of stroke patients may be useful for rapid, noninvasive detection of AAAthero and to assess its severity, especially in moderate to severe arch disease. TEE, being invasive and requiring immense patient cooperation in comparison to CTA, is unlikely to add further information to detect aorto-embolic sources seen in patients with moderate to severe arch disease if initial arch-to-vertex CTA is negative for significant arch atherosclerosis. Finally, plaques located on the transverse segment of the aortic arch can be better visualized on CTA than TEE, while the latter could detect subtle intimal–medial changes seen in the mild arch disease. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of interest. Supplementary Material 1. Medline and Embase search strategy. 2. eFigure 1 . PRISMA flow diagram of included studies. 3. eTable 1. Quality assessment of included studies. Search strategy Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL <1946 to October 20, 2023> # Query Results from 22 Oct 2023 1 exp Ischemic Stroke/ 11358 2 cryptogenic stroke.mp. 2016 3 exp Computed Tomography Angiography/ 14883 4 CT angiography.mp. 14336 5 1 or 2 13100 6 3 or 4 26297 7 5 and 6 305 Database: Embase <1974 to 2023 October 20, 2023> # Query Results from 22 Oct 2023 1 exp Ischemic Stroke/ 30,155 2 cryptogenic stroke.mp. 3,840 3 exp Computed Tomography Angiography/ 88,724 4 CT angiography.mp. 26,254 5 1 or 2 33,673 6 3 or 4 93,459 7 5 and 6 2,014