Introduction Each year ~795,000 people in the United States have a stroke, and acute ischemic stroke accounts for 87% of all cases . Despite interventional advancements, such as recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) or mechanical thrombectomy (MT), stroke outcomes remain suboptimal, with high rates of long-term disability and recurrence 1 . To improve outcomes, research has pivoted towards investigation of thrombus characteristics on pre-treatment (pre-MT) CT imaging and their relationship to clinical outcomes. Specifically, studies aim to identify robust predictors of recanalization success through radiomic analysis of clots on CT 2 – 4 . Unfortunately, the limited biological interpretability of radiomics has hindered clinical application, an ongoing challenge across domains 5 , 6 . The difference in scale between microscopic pathological phenomena and “macro” CT likely undermines feature interpretability because cells are far smaller than CT voxel size 7 . Confirmation of how microscopic clot characteristics (e.g., WBC density) manifest as RFs on “macro” CT could transform radiomic interpretability and primary interventions in both stroke and other acute syndromes. 7 To bridge this gap, studies have attempted to perform histological analysis of MT-retrieved thrombi and correlated histological composition (clot percentage red blood cells – RBCs, fibrin-platelet aggregates – FPs, and white blood cells – WBC) with radiomics and outcome measures 8 , 9 . While relationships among composition, radiomics, and outcome have been identified, their relationship to clot biology and stroke etiology remain unclear, particularly for WBCs. Robust approaches are needed that relate microscopic clot phenomena and “macro” pre-treatment imaging. Such methods have tremendous potential to inform the selection and efficacy of primary interventions. For example, prediction of neutrophil extracellular traps density in thrombi could indicate tPA resistance 6 , 10 – 12 and suggest need for an alternative intervention. 13 , 14 Here, we hypothesized that correlation of clot microCT data with clot histology (light microscopy) may help in interpretation of biological results from pre-treatment imaging, by using complementary information from each imaging modality. To this end, we completed a multimodal CT imaging, radiomic, and histological percent composition analysis of stroke clots and identified clot radiomics highly correlated among pre-treatment imaging and post-treatment histology. Furthermore, this data-driven, reductionist approach was able to identify significant correlations between CT RFs and fundamental clot biology (histological percent composition). Methods Patient Data This study was approved by our institute’s institutional review board (study 00002092). All methods were performed in accordance with the approved protocol, and written informed consent was obtained for all subjects. Clot samples and imaging were collected as previously described from patients receiving MT by either stent retriever, aspiration, or a combined therapy between November 2018 and November 2019 at our institution. Patients considered for this study met the following criteria: 1) They had undergone MT for acute ischemic stroke, 2) had pretreatment CT available with sufficient image quality and an identifiable clot, 3) had a retrieved clot of sufficient size and quality for microCT and histology, and 4) did not receive intra-arterial tPA. Clots were collected immediately after thrombectomy and stored in 10% phosphate buffered formalin for 24–28 hours, after which they were transferred to 70% ethanol. 15 CTA and nCCT Imaging For all patients, CT was performed on an Aquilion ONE scanner (Canon Medical Systems). The tube voltage and tube current were set to 135 kV(peak) and 370–600 mA, respectively, for NCCT, and 120 kVp and 150–205 mA, respectively, for CTA. The reconstructed voxel sizes for NCCT and CTA were set to 0.4×0.4×0.5 mm 3 and 0.5×0.5×0.5 mm 3 , respectively. For CTA, Omnipaque 350 contrast agent (iohexol; GE Healthcare) was given at a rate of ∼5 mL/s in CT perfusion during image acquisition. The CTA image with the lowest thickness (0.5 mm) and highest resolution was selected for analysis of the clot region. CTA and nCCT Image Registration, Clot Segmentation, and Feature Extraction Vessels were segmented from CTA image data, and clots were segmented from both CTA and nCCT data, as previously described ( 16 Figure 1 ). 3D slicer was used to register CTA and nCCT images, manually segment and reconstruct patient vasculatures, and isolate the clot region of interest. PyRadiomics , an open-source Python package, was used to extract textural features from segmented clot regions in both the CTA and nCCT images (bin size=64, no resampling). Textural features described pixel intensity distributions and included first order statistics (FOS), gray-level run length matrix (GLRLM), gray-level dependence matrix (GLDM), gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), and gray-level size zone matrix (GLSZM). Shape features were not extracted. Formulae for RFs are available in the PyRadiomics documentation ( 17 https://pyradiomics.readthedocs.io/ ). Combined, CTA and nCCT clot radiomic features totaled 186 features (93 per modality). Features were normalized between 0 and 1 for subsequent analyses. MicroCT Imaging and Processing Prior to imaging, clots were incubated in 50% Lugol’s Iodine Solution to maximize contrast and minimize noise in MicroCT image data, without exposing samples to excessive voltage . Imaging was completed using a ScanCo MicroCT 100 (voltage=90kV, current=155 µA) at 4.9 µm nominal isotropic resolution. The detector was calibrated so that Hounsfield Units values were adjusted for air (−1,000) and water (0). After imaging, samples were de-stained through repeated washes with 70% ethanol. 18 Clots were manually segmented from microCT image data ( Figure 1 ) in 3D slicer using an intensity-based threshold . Radiomic features extracted from clot regions in CTA and nCCT images were also extracted from microCT data ( 19 n =93 features). Features were normalized between zero and one for subsequent statistical analysis. For a detailed list of radiomic feature names and corresponding numerical identifiers see Supplemental Table 1 . Clot Histology and Percent Composition Analysis Histology was performed as previously described . Clots were collected immediately after thrombectomy and stored in 10% phosphate buffered formalin for 24–28 hours, after which they were transferred to 70% ethanol. In the histology core at our institution, tissue was automatically prepared in a tissue processor, where it was serially infused with 70% ethanol, 90% ethanol, 100% ethanol, xylenes, and paraffin under pressure to ensure proper infusion. Samples were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 4 µm, and sections were collected on SuperFrost Plus (Fisher) slides to ensure tissue adhesion. For H&E staining, samples were deparaffinized in xylene, incubated in serial solutions of ethanol (100%–50%), and hydrated in water. Then, they were incubated in hematoxylin for 7–8 minutes and washed and incubated in eosin for 1–2 minutes, then dehydrated in graded ethanol, cleared in xylenes, and mounted on a glass microscope slide with a xylene-based mounting medium. Whole slide images (WSIs) were obtained by scanning at 40X on the ImageScope digital histology platform (Leica Biosystems). 9 Clot component percent composition was then calculated from digital histology. First, RBC, FP, and WBC components were segmented from low resolution WSIs using Orbit Image Analysis ( 20 www.orbit.bio ), as described previously . Percent composition of each clot component was then calculated as the proportion of pixels in the clot region belonging to each component class (e.g., RBC percent composition=[RBC pixel area/clot pixel area]*100). See 9 Supplemental Table 2 for the percent compositions of all clots studied in this work. Statistical Analysis Statistical analysis was completed to assess textural feature similarity between imaging modalities. Normality was assessed using the Anderson Darling Test Statistic . Correlation between two imaging modalities for a given radiomic textural feature (e.g., microCT vs. CTA for First Order 10 21 th Percentile of Pixel Intensity), or between radiomic features and histological percent composition, was completed using Pearson (parametric) or Spearman (nonparametric) correlation . Given that we have completed multiple simultaneous tests, we completed corrections for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate correction. A false discovery rate-corrected 22 p -value (a.k.a., q -value) <0.05 was considered to be statistically significant in this study. Results Summary of Patient Population A summary of patient characteristics has been provided in Supplemental Table 3 . This preliminary study included 10 patients (70% female, 30% male). The mean (± standard deviation) age of patients was 67.4±15.2 years, and NIHSS at presentation was 14.9±8.1. In our cohort, 30% of strokes were treated with stent retriever thrombectomy, 40% with aspiration, and 30% with combination therapy (Solumbra). Occlusions were primarily located on the left (60%). 40% of clots were located at the M1, 40% at the ICA/M1 junction, and 20% at the superior ICA. Paired Radiomic Features Exhibited High Correlation Between microCT and CT To identify scale-invariant radiomics between pre-MT CT and post-MT microCT, we completed paired correlation analysis of radiomics between imaging modalities with correction for multiple testing. We found that 18 radiomic features had a strong and significant correlation ( R >0.65, q <0.05) between MicroCT and CTA. The RFs with the highest R/ p were GCLM Cluster Prominence ( R =0.96, q <0.001) and Cluster Shade ( R =0.92, q <0.001). These GLCM radiomics were primarily associated with clot texture or the heterogeneity of the voxel intensity distribution in clots ( Fig. 2A ), suggesting that distribution of clot components such as RBC (high Hounsfield units) and FP (low Hounsfield units) is preserved across scale. A detailed list of all features and their correlation results can be found in Supplemental Table 4A . Between microCT and nCCT, we found that 5 radiomic features exhibited strong and significant correlation ( R >0.65, q <0.05) ( Fig. 2B ). The RFs with the highest R/ p were FOS Energy ( R =0.90, q <0.001) and FOS Total Energy ( R =0.90, q <0.001). In general, RFs were primarily associated with the cumulative intensity of the clot region ( Fig. 2B ), suggesting that clot hyper density (a function of RBC percent composition ) is preserved across scale. A detailed list of all features and their correlation results can be found in 23 Supplemental Table 4B . Significant RFs common among all 3 CT imaging modalities included FOS Energy and FOS Total Energy. When these significant RFs (e.g., FOS Total Energy) were visualized based on voxel-level contribution, clot voxel regions contributing to higher feature values were found to coincide across scale ( Figure 2C ). Across all three CT imaging modalities, voxel regions contributing most (red=max value, dark blue=min value) to FOS Total Energy coincided, allowing for the first-time perceivable differences in microscopic clot structure to be interpreted from “macro” CT. Significant Radiomic Associations were Identified Among CT Modalities Given the difference in voxel size between microCT and CT, there exists potential for unique RF combinations to exhibit correlation across scale. Thus, we also completed correlation analysis of unpaired RFs between pre-MT CT and post-MT microCT. Like our paired RF analysis, strong and significant correlations were observed among radiomic features between CT imaging modalities. After correction for multiple testing, we identified 377 significant, positively correlated RFs ( Fig. 3A ) and 36 significant, negatively correlated RFs ( Fig. 3B ) between microCT and CTA. Overall, the RF families with the most positively correlated features between microCT and CTA were microCT GLCM and CTA GLSZM (53 RF pairs, 14.06% of all correlated RFs). The RF families with the most negatively correlated features between microCT and CTA were microCT GLCM and CTA GLRLM (6 RF pairs, 16.67% of all correlated RFs). Overall, these RF family correlations suggest that greater voxel complexity at the microCT clot scale should be reflected in more macro nCCT as fewer contiguous regions of similar intensity. We also identified 168 significant, positively correlated RFs ( Fig. 3C ) and 41 significant, negatively correlated RFs ( Fig. 3D ) between microCT and nCCT. Overall, the RF families with the most positively correlated features between microCT and nCCT were microCT FOS and nCCT GLSZM (30 RF pairs, 17.86% of all correlated RFs). The RF families with the most negatively correlated features between microCT and nCCT were microCT FOS and nCCT GLCM (12 RF pairs, 29.27% of all correlated RFs). Overall, these RF family correlations suggest that greater cumulative voxel intensity (%RBC) in microCT should be reflected in “macro” nCCT as more contiguous regions of high voxel intensity. Scale Invariant Radiomics are Significant Indicators of Clot Composition Qualitative comparison of clot virtual cross-sections in microCT with digital histology exemplified radiomic feature interpretability ( Fig. 4 ). Here, high intensity, or bright, regions in microCT ( Fig. 4A ) correspond to RBC-rich regions in histology ( Fig. 4B ), while low intensity regions correspond to FP aggregates. Furthermore, regions of intermediate intensity translate to WBC-dense regions at the interface between RBC and FP components. While the presented histology and microCT are not 1:1 and could not be registered for pixel-level correlation, the image scales and clot cross-sections are more than comparable. Unfortunately, registration of clot histology with any CT image is notoriously difficult due to the inability to preserve clot orientation after thrombectomy. Regardless, in our study, microCT and histologic cross-sections were sufficient for RF visualization and interpretation ( Fig. 4C ). Several scale-invariant radiomic features were found to be significantly correlated with clot histological composition. Of the 18 scale-invariant RFs measured from CTA, 5 demonstrated strong and significant correlation with histological composition. More specifically, positive correlations were observed between %RBC and clot structural heterogeneity quantified by GLRLM and GLDM RFs ( R >0.60, q <0.01). Moreover, negative correlations were observed between %FP and GLRLM and GLSZM RFs ( R <−0.60, q <0.01). %RBC was also found to be negatively correlated with GLDM LGLE ( R =−0.60, q =0.023). Of the 5 scale-invariant RFs measured from nCCT, only GLDM Dependence Non-Uniformity demonstrated strong and significant correlation with both %RBC ( R =0.56, q =0.046) and %FP (R=−0.57, q =0.036) ( Fig. 4D ). As expected, correlations with %RBC and %FP compositions were comparable magnitude but opposite in sign (positive v. negative), given that the %RBC and %FP of a clot complement each other. Overall, the most important finding was that scale-invariant RFs, when measured from “macro” CT modalities (CTA, nCCT) exhibited notable correlation with clot RBC and FP components, that define the broader clot architecture. When the scale-invariant RFs measured from microCT were correlated with clot composition, 4 RFs were found to be strongly and negatively correlated with WBC percent composition ( Fig. 4E ). These RFs included FOS Energy ( R =−0.59, q =0.030), FOS Total Energy ( R =−0.59, q =0.030), GLSZM Size Zone Non-Uniformity ( R =−0.66, q =0.001), and GLDM Dependence Non-Uniformity ( R =−0.70, q =0.001). Interestingly, scale-invariant RFs measured from microCT, exhibited notable correlation with clot WBC instances, which are microscopic phenomena, rather than larger RBC and FP compartments. Discussion We investigated whether computational analysis of clot microCT could help bridge the gap in scale between clot histological composition and pre-MT CT. For 10 stroke thrombi, we collected pre-MT CTA and nCCT, generated microCT and H&E histology of retrieved clots and analyzed radiomics and histological composition. As a part of this workflow, we optimized a staining/de-staining and imaging protocol that maximized contrast and resolution (voxel size=4.9 µm) in microCT, while also allowing for subsequent histological processing and H&E-staining. Intensive statistical analyses were performed to identify a correlation between clot pre-MT CT and histology, where microCT complemented both histology in scale as well as CT in modality (radiomics). In the end we identified scale invariant radiomic features from multimodal CT that demonstrated significant correlation with histological composition. We believe our “virtual dissection” of stroke thrombi by microCT will facilitate computational investigation of clinically relevant biological phenomena in pre-treatment imaging. To date, several stroke studies have investigated the relationship between CT features and clinical outcomes (e.g., first pass effect). While radiomic indicators of thrombectomy outcome have been identified , biological interpretation of what those radiomics mean remains unclear. Hofmeister et al., Qiu et al., and many others, have pointed to the gap in scale between pre-MT CT and prothrombotic phenomena (e.g., WBC-FP interactions) as the factor limiting interpretability of RFs 10 , 24 , 25 . To address this, researchers have looked to imaging techniques offering complementary information to both histology and CT. For example, LaGrange et al. demonstrated the feasibility of using microCT (nominal resolution=50 µm) to study clot microstructure and identify correlates between histological composition and Hounsfield units 24 , 25 . An important finding was that a higher mean Hounsfield unit corresponded to RBC-rich or “red” clots, while FP-rich or “white” clots were characterized by a lower average Hounsfield unit. Indeed, our qualitative analyses of clot histology and microCT also showed that RBC regions were associated with higher intensity voxels. Unfortunately, such past works did not investigate relationships between microCT and WBCs (likely due to imaging resolution [50 um]) or microCT and pre-MT CT. Moreover, image feature analysis in these studies was limited to mean intensity (Hounsfield units), without exploration RFs. We believed that paired radiomic analysis of the same clot in CT, high resolution microCT, and histology would expand upon the biological interpretability of clot CT. 23 To our knowledge, our work is the first to not only take the next step towards interconnecting histology, microCT, and pre-treatment CT, but also do so through quantification of well validated features among the different data. Here we identified scale invariant features between both microCT and pre-MT CTA ( n =18), and microCT and pre-MT nCCT ( n =5). These RFs suggested that both the global and local texture, as well as the high intensity voxel distribution (RBC component), of thrombi is preserved across scale and may be reproducibly quantifiable. For example, the RFs with the highest R/ p between microCT and CTA were GCLM Cluster Prominence and Cluster Shade. As measures of the skewness and uniformity of the GLCM, higher cluster prominence and shade values imply greater asymmetry about the mean intensity value and can be interpreted as similar voxel-level intensity variation between microCT and CTA. Additionally, the RFs with the highest R/ p between microCT and nCCT were FOS Energy and FOS Total Energy. These RFs describe the cumulative intensity of the clot region, and given our observations between CT and histology, suggest that the %RBC and %FP composition of the clot is preserved across scale. Given that many RFs are computationally similar, we completed unpaired correlation analysis of RFs among CT imaging modalities. Our objective was to assess how some RFs computed at the microscale associate with other RFs computed at the macro-scale. We found 377 positive and 36 negative significant correlations between microCT and CTA RFs, as well as 168 positive and 41 negative significant correlations between microCT and nCCT RFs. The correlated RFs were predominately associated with clot texture as quantified by second order statistics (e.g., GLCM cluster features), suggesting that global texture also transcends scale. Although outside the scope of this work, such scale-dependent correlations may be important for future works investigating radiomic clot signatures in pre-MT CT. For example, identified associations could be explored for differential enrichment between thrombectomy outcomes (e.g., first pass success effect) towards augmenting clinical decision making from pre-treatment imaging. To maximize the interpretability of RFs, we correlated our 23 scale-invariant RFs with histological percent composition. More specifically, we completed three studies that correlated composition with the 18 scale invariant RFs from pre-MT CTA, the 5 scale invariant RFs from pre-MT nCCT, and the 23 total scale invariant RFs but when computed from microCT. This analysis resulted in what we believe to be the most important findings in this work. We found that scale-invariant RFs, when measured from “macro” CT modalities (CTA, nCCT) exhibited significant correlation with clot RBC and FP components (broader clot architecture). However, when the same RFs were measured from microCT, we observed strong and significant correlation with %WBC. We believe that these results are due to the nominal isotropic resolution, or voxel size, of each CT modality. In our data, the resolution of CTA and nCCT was ~0.08 mm 3 , whereas microCT images had a voxel size of 4.9 µm. At ~1/3 the diameter of a neutrophil , the microCT imaging allows for resolution of the cellular scale, and thus facilitates biological interpretation of RFs. Those RFs found to be both scale invariant and significantly correlated with %WBC may be used to infer WBC-driven, pro-thrombotic biological phenomena (e.g., WBC-platelet interactions, NET density) from thrombi in pre-MT imaging, and may be further investigated with respect to patient-specific thrombus characteristics (e.g., tPA resistance, stroke etiology). Ultimately, our computational findings provide quantitative evidence that scale inhibits the biological interpretability of thrombi in pre-treatment imaging. 26 We believe that scale invariant RFs identified through the multimodal CT and histological analysis we present here could eventually be used in clinical workflows. Indeed, the identified scale-invariant RFs (and their histological correlates) can be a robust feature set for the development of machine learning models to predict clot composition from pre-treatment CT imaging. The ability for real-time prediction of clot composition from CT images would have tremendous implications for critical treatment decisions, including improvement of thrombectomy device selection for better first-pass success and lower complication rates. For example, identification of a FP-rich clot may lead to the selection of a device designed for stiff clots (e.g., the Nimbus) on the first pass rather than as a rescue therapy. Conversely, pre-treatment identification of an RBC-rich, soft clot may suggest use of aspiration , in order not cross the clot and minimize risk of fragmentation and embolization. Future machine learning and validation studies, in larger datasets are needed to accomplish this goal. 27 , 28 Our work has limitations. First of all, our sample size in this study is small, but the multimodal CT and histology data generated is to our knowledge the first of its kind. To prevent false discoveries, we implemented intensive statistical analyses to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. Furthermore, there are limitations of stroke clot histopathology that have been described previously . These include, the inability to preserve clot orientation post-thrombectomy, the potential for fixation artifacts during clot preservation, and the analysis of a single histological section. However, studies have shown that the percent composition of the clot is relatively consistent throughout and thus quantification of a single section is sufficient 29 . Finally, clot components, such as clot collagen density and calcification, may be of clinical interest for radiomics correlation. However, labeling these components requires specialized stains or high-resolution imaging (such as electron microscopy). This will be the focus of future studies. While this work is preliminary, it presents a feasible and reproducible quantitative approach to investigate RFs across scale, and in tandem, with clot histology. 30 Conclusion Here, we present the generation and analysis of a unique ischemic stroke clot dataset. To our knowledge, our study is the first to complete multimodal, multiscale CT and histological analysis of ischemic stroke thrombi. Moreover, this study is the first to complete a detailed statistical analysis of radiomic features across scale, and investigation of their relationship to histological composition. Our findings suggest that RFs from retrieved clot microCT can be used to identify strong and significant correlations between histology and pre-MT CT, with increased biological interpretability. Upon further validation with bigger data and immunohistochemistry, it is our hope that scale invariant RFs may be used for real-time biological interpretation of stroke thrombi to improve patient-specific treatment in the critical intervention window. Supplementary Material