WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC Patients with acute ischaemic stroke accompanied by large vessel occlusion may still have a poor outcome even if they undergo reperfusion therapy such as intravenous thrombolysis or endovascular treatment that achieves vascular recanalisation to some extent. Currently, the mechanisms believed to be associated with futile recanalisation include inflammation, blood–brain barrier disruption, microcirculatory dysfunction and so on. Nevertheless, there is an urgent need for additional research to improve patient outcomes. Considering that futile recanalisation may be associated with various pathophysiological pathways or targets, treatment may include protecting the endothelium, suppressing inflammation and improving microcirculation. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS It is a prospective, randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled, parallel, phase II trial, designed to assess the efficacy and safety of Y-6 sublingual tablets in patients with intracranial large vessel occlusion within 24 hours of onset. HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY This prospective study explores the use of Y-6 sublingual tablets (cilostazol and dexborneol) prior to endovascular treatment within 24 hours of onset in patients with acute ischaemic stroke accompanied by intracranial large vessel occlusion. That aims to determine whether early multitarget combination therapy results in increased benefits for more patients. This prospective study investigates the safety and efficacy of early use of Y-6 sublingual tablets (cilostazol and dexborneol) in patients with ischaemic stroke accompanied by large vessel occlusion, aiming to improve outcomes. Introduction and rationale Revascularisation within the time window is the most effective treatment for acute ischemic stroke. Strokes constitute one of the major causes of death and disability globally, and most of them are associated with ischaemic cerebrovascular diseases. Due to the high morbidity, recurrence rate and disability rate, strokes have imposed a heavy burden on patients’ families and the broader society. More than one-third of acute ischaemic strokes (AISs) are attributed to large vessel occlusion (LVO), 1 and the key to treatment lies in early revascularisation of the occluded vessels to salvage the ischaemic penumbra and brain tissues as far as possible. 2 Some trials, 3 4 5 10 including MR CLEAN, ESCAPE, EXTEND-IA, SWIFT PRIME, DAWN and DEFUSE-3, have confirmed the effectiveness of endovascular treatment and the significance of early revascularisation in improving clinical outcomes of patients with LVO-induced ischaemic stroke. The incidence of futile recanalisation (FR) following endovascular treatment of stroke remains high. With the rapid advancement and increasingly wide application of endovascular treatment, how to address FR has become an urgent clinical priority. FR is identified when an AIS patient has a successful recanalisation following endovascular treatment (Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction (TICI)≥grade 2b/3) but fails to achieve functional independence at 90 days. In a meta-analysis, 43% of 402 LVO-induced AIS patients who were successfully recanalised following endovascular treatment experienced FR. 11 In a German single-centre retrospective study, among the 123 patients included, who achieved mTICI grade 3 following endovascular treatment within 6 hours of onset, the FR incidence was 55%. 12 In another study, among 327 patients undergoing endovascular treatment between 6 and 24 hours after onset, the FR incidence was 53%. 13 Based on the above studies, the symptoms of nearly half of the patients did not improve or even worsened after endovascular treatment or other reperfusion therapies. This indicated that the burden on patients’ families and the broader society remains substantial. 14 The mechanism behind FR is complex, and possible contributing factors include microcirculation dysfunction and inflammation. The mechanism behind FR is not yet fully understood. Possible contributing factors include (1) extensive vascular endothelial damage subsequent to reperfusion therapy; (2) microcirculation dysfunction caused by local thrombosis and distal occlusion ; (3) damage from thrombo-inflammation and excitatory amino acids; (4) blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption and (5) early recurrence resulting from platelet aggregation. 15 For Y-6 sublingual tablets, the active ingredients are cilostazol and dexborneol; and owing to sublingual administration, which ensures rapid onset of action, this multitarget early-stage drug is considered as a promising therapy. Cilostazol, as an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 3, 16 elevates the level of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate and thus exerts vasodilatory and antiplatelet effects. In addition, cilostazol has been widely used in the treatment of AIS, cerebral small vessel disease, and peripheral arterial disease. It has been demonstrated that cilostazol acts on cerebrovascular endothelial cells, maintains the integrity of the BBB, 17 18 20 and provides neuroprotective effects. As for dexborneol, it not only inhibits the expression of inflammatory factors and proteins, such as TNF-α, IL-1β and COX-2 induced by local ischaemia/reperfusion but also suppresses glutamate excitotoxicity. 21 22 23 Due to the complex mechanism behind FR, there is a pressing need to develop multitarget therapeutic agents to improve microcirculation dysfunction after reperfusion therapy, so as to reduce the FR incidence and ensure patients’ clinical benefits from endovascular treatment. Methods Design This is a prospective, multicentre, randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled, parallel, phase II trial. All subjects are followed up for 3 months to assess outcome events. Population Subjects (n=300) are being recruited from 36 hospitals. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are summarised below. Inclusion criteria 35–80 years. Diagnosed with AIS within 24 hours of onset (ie, the time from onset to start of endovascular treatment). A modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 0–1 in the first stroke or before stroke. Acute intracranial LVO supported by imaging tests, including occlusion of intracranial segments of internal carotid arteries, T-shaped bifurcation, middle cerebral artery (MCA) M1 and/or M2 segments, and anterior cerebral artery (ACA) A1 and/or A2 segments. The Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS) of 6 or above at screening. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) of 7–25 after this onset. Eligible for mechanical thrombectomy and scheduled to receive endovascular treatment. Informed consent form signed by the patient or his/her legal representative Exclusion criteria Severe disorder of consciousness at screening: NIHSS 1a: score ≥2. A confirmed history of intracranial haemorrhage at screening, including parenchymal haemorrhage, intraventricular haemorrhage, subarachnoid haemorrhage and subdural/external haematoma. Previously diagnosed with intracranial tumour, arteriovenous malformation or aneurysm at screening. Bilateral LVO in the anterior circulation or LVO in the posterior circulation at screening. LVO of unknown or rare aetiology (eg, dissection, vasculitis) at screening. Treated with tirofiban, warfarin, novel oral anticoagulants, argatroban, snake venom, defibrase, lumbrokinase, or other defibrase therapies after onset, or a platelet count <100×10 9 /L. A confirmed history of severe hepatic/renal insufficiency or receiving dialysis for various reasons at screening which severe hepatic insufficiency is defined as alanine aminotransferase (ALT)>3 times the normal upper limit or aspartate aminotransferase (AST)>3 times the normal upper limit and severe renal insufficiency is defined as serum creatinine >3.0 mg/dL (265.2 µmol/L) or creatinine clearance <30 mL/min). A previously diagnosed haemorrhagic tendency (including but not limited to hereditary haemorrhagic disorders, such as haemophilia) at screening. With refractory hypertension that is difficult to control with medications (systolic blood pressure >180 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure >110 mm Hg). A history of major head trauma or stroke within 1 month prior to randomisation. Underwent intracranial or spinal surgery within 3 months prior to randomisation. A history of major surgery or serious physical injury within 1 month prior to randomisation. Previously diagnosed with haemorrhagic retinopathy. Male subjects (or their partners) or female subjects, who plan to have a baby during the study or within 3 months on completion of the study or are unwilling to use one or more non-medication forms of birth control (eg, complete abstinence, condoms and ligation) throughout the study. Contraindications to contrast agents; or allergic to cilostazol or dexborneol. Planning to receive other surgical procedures or interventional therapies within 3 months, which may require discontinuation of the investigational drugs. A life expectancy of less than 3 months due to advanced-stage comorbidities. Treated with the investigational drugs or devices within the past 3 months. Any other conditions that may adversely affect patient compliance or suitability for participation in the study, in the opinion of the investigators. Randomisation Subjects are randomised into the Y-6 sublingual tablets low-dose group, Y-6 sublingual tablets high-dose group, cilostazol tablets low-dose group, cilostazol tablets high-dose group or placebo group, by the ratio of 1:1:1:1:1 ( figure 1 ). Y-6 placebo tablets are identical to Y-6 sublingual tablets in colour, traits and packaging (including batch number and expiration date); and cilostazol placebo tablets resemble cilostazol tablets in colour and shape. In this study, centralised competitive randomisation is adopted, whereby each subject is uniquely assigned a ‘screening number’ after signing the informed consent form and before receiving any necessary tests and examinations. Subject screening numbers cannot be reused. Figure 1 Design of FUTURE study. FUTURE, EFfects of Y-6 SUblingual Tablets for PaTients with AcUte Ischemic StRokE. Interventions The investigational drugs include Y-6 sublingual tablets (each tablet contains 25 mg of cilostazol and 6 mg of dexborneol); cilostazol tablets (each tablet contains 50 mg of cilostazol); cilostazol placebo tablets (each tablet contains 0 mg of cilostazol) and Y-6 placebo tablets (each tablet contains 0 mg of cilostazol and 0.06 mg of dexborneol) ( table 1 ). Table 1 Combinations of investigational drugs used in each group Group Y-6 sublingual tablets Y-6 placebo tablets Cilostazol tablets Cilostazol placebo tablets Y-6 sublingual tablets low-dose group 1 1 0 Two halves Y-6 sublingual tablets high-dose group 2 0 0 Two halves Cilostazol tablets low-dose group 0 2 0.5 0.5 Cilostazol tablets high-dose group 0 2 Two halves 0 Placebo group 0 2 0 Two halves The first dose, consisting of two sublingual tablets and oral tablets (two halves), should be administered as soon as possible after randomisation and before endovascular treatment. The second dose must be given at least 10 hours after the first dose. Subsequent doses should be administered twice daily (Q12±1 hour). The medication cycle is 28 days. The two sublingual tablets (Y-6 sublingual tablet and Y-6 placebo tablet) should be kept under the tongue, preferably near the frenulum, until the subject no longer has any noticeable foreign body sensation. The subject should not directly chew or swallow any undissolved sublingual tablets. The two oral tablets, namely one tablet from each of the two bottles (cilostazol tablets and cilostazol placebo tablets), should be split using a pill cutter, and the subject should take one-half orally from each bottle. Administration of oral tablets followed by sublingual tablets is recommended. The combinations of the investigational drugs to be taken in each group are listed in table 1 . If signs of bleeding are observed during the administration, the investigator may consider imaging rechecks. In the case of asymptomatic intracranial haemorrhage, medication can continue as normal after the judgement. If imaging rechecks suggest symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage, medication must be discontinued. When serious adverse events occur or the subject is unable to tolerate the medications, the investigator may suspend the medication, adjust the dosage to once daily or discontinue the medication, as appropriate. Study arrangements The follow-up period is about 3 months. The visits are scheduled as follows: screening/baseline, 24±2 hours, 7±2 days, 28±3 days and 90±7 days after randomisation, and additional visits as needed ( table 2 ). All the follow-up visits are face to face. During the visits, demographics and clinical information, including use of medications, will be collected. Safety events will be followed up. All available information, including imaging copies and diagnosis sheets, will be evaluated by healthcare professionals and kept for reference. Table 2 Schedule of visits for FUTURE study Visit Assessment Screening/baseline Follow-up Visit 1 Predose/baseline Visit 2 24±2 hours after randomisation Visit 3 7±2 days after randomisation Visit 4 28+3 days after randomisation 4 Visit 5 90±7 days after randomisation Additional visit Informed consent form • Verification against inclusion/exclusion criteria • Demographics • Medical and medication history • Vital signs and physical examination • • • ASPECTS • Imaging • • NIHSS • • • • • mRS • • • Laboratory tests • • • ECG • Randomisation • Drug administration • • • Complications • • • • • • Safety events • • • • • Concomitant medications • • • • • • ASPECTs, ‌Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score; FUTURE, EFfects of Y-6 SUblingual Tablets for PaTients with AcUte Ischemic StRokE; mRS, modified Rankin Scale; NIHSS, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale. Outcomes Primary outcomes Proportion of subjects whose mRS score recover to 0–1 at 90±7 days after randomisation. Secondary outcomes mRS score at 90±7 days after randomisation. Changes in NIHSS score from baseline to 24±2 hours, 7±2 days and 28±3 days after randomisation. Proportion of subjects with early neurological deterioration at 24±2 hours after randomisation. Proportion of subjects with combined vascular events at 90±7 days after randomisation. Safety outcomes Symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage at 28±3 days after randomisation (per Heidelberg haemorrhage classification). Any bleeding events within 90±7 days after randomisation. Vascular deaths within 90±7 days after randomisation. All-cause deaths within 90±7 days after randomisation. Adverse events/serious adverse events reported by the investigators within 90±7 days after randomisation (including absolute platelet count <100×10 9 /L, hypersensitivity reaction and kidney failure, etc). Some of the above terms are explained in online supplemental table 1 . Sample size calculation This study provides effect size data for sample size calculations in the subsequent large-scale, randomised, controlled trials, aiming to evaluate the safety and efficacy of Y-6 sublingual tablets in AIS patients undergoing endovascular treatment. In this multicentre, randomised, double-blinded, parallel, placebo-controlled trial, the sample size is not determined based on power calculations, but by the estimated number of subjects and the minimum number of subjects needed for evaluation purposes. As a result, a total of 300 patients are recruited for the study, with 60 patients in each group. The figure is larger than the minimum number of subjects recommended for phase II trials. Statistical analyses In this study, the primary efficacy is evaluated based on the full analysis set and per protocol set, while safety is analysed by using the safety set. For the primary efficacy outcome, the group difference is checked through a χ 2 test, and the corresponding 95% CI between the proportions is estimated by normal approximation. The RR and 95% CI for mRS score of 0–1 on day 90 after randomisation are calculated using a generalised linear model. For secondary efficacy outcomes, binary outcomes are analysed with an approach similar to that used for the primary efficacy outcome. The mRS scores on day 90 of all groups are compared by ordinal logistic regression, calculated common OR and 95% CI. Changes in the NIHSS score from the baseline to hour 24, day 7 and day 28 in each group are expressed in means with 95% CIs, and the mean differences between the groups are estimated and analysed through a covariance model. For safety outcomes, the group differences are investigated by Fisher’s exact test. A p＜0.05 (two tailed) is considered statistically significant. SAS V.9.4 software is used for statistical analyses. Several clinical committees are shown in online supplemental table 2 . Data and safety monitoring board The data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) for this study comprises academic experts and statisticians, independent of the study conduct. The DSMB protects the interests of subjects throughout the study, regularly supervises the conduct and progress of the study, assesses the associated risks and benefits, and monitors adverse events as necessary. Data management and quality control This study uses an electronic data capture system, which is based on electronic case report forms, to facilitate the collection of study data. The investigators are trained and the study data are stored in compliance with the Good Clinical Practice guidelines. Besides, clinical research associates regularly perform quality control checks on study processes and data storage on study sites, so as to ensure that the study is conducted per the protocol and that the study data are authentic. Criteria for study withdrawal Subjects may request withdrawal from the study at any time. In addition, when subjects develop any clinical or other conditions, making them no longer suitable to stay in the study, the investigators, based on their judgement, will consider patient withdrawal from the study. Discussion The EFfects of Y-6 SUblingual Tablets for PaTients with AcUte Ischemic StRokE study is a randomised, multicentre, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel, placebo-controlled clinical trial, aiming to preliminarily investigate the efficacy and safety of Y-6 sublingual tablets (containing cilostazol and dexborneol) in patients with AIS scheduled for endovascular treatment. Cerebroprotection has long been a focus in the search for treatment for AIS worldwide, but the translation of multiple drugs has proven unsuccessful so far. Based on the theory proposed by the Stroke Treatment Academic Industry Roundtable X, cerebroprotectants may work synergistically with thrombolysis and endovascular treatment. 24 25 For the patients who underwent endovascular treatment, appropriate protection of the neurovascular unit and multitargeted cerebroprotection may help improve patient outcomes. 26 The BAST study (Butylphthalide for Acute Ischemic Stroke Patients Receiving Intravenous Thrombolysis or Endovascular Treatment) has already investigated this model and found that, the use of DL-3-n-butylphthalide in AIS patients, who were given alteplase for intravenous thrombolysis or received endovascular treatment or bridging therapy, resulted in favourable functional outcomes within 90 days, when compared with the placebo. 27 Y-6 sublingual tablets investigated in this study contain two components (namely cilostazol and dexborneol) and may be classified as a cerebroprotectant targeting multiple cascade reactions in AIS. Cerebrovascular studies on compound formulations containing borneol have been carried out before. For example, edaravone and dexborneol injection, which has been extensively studied for neurological diseases, has been proven to improve the 90-day functional outcomes of AIS patients within 48 hours, better than edaravone alone. 28 29 In this study, it is determined that sublingual tablets should be administered before endovascular treatment because cerebroprotection prior to reperfusion therapy may better mitigate infarction-related inflammatory responses, inhibit platelet aggregation, improve microcirculation and further salvage penumbral tissues. Moreover, this sublingual medication is different from conventional intravenous or oral medications, as it is easy to administer. In addition, it is not restricted by dysphagia or lesion site, and its use has no impact on the time window of endovascular treatment. Once the medication comes into contact with saliva, it is rapidly dissolved and absorbed to reach the therapeutic concentration. 30 Previous studies have demonstrated that sublingual edaravone and dexborneol, which is a neuroprotectant, exhibited promising efficacy and safety in improving functional outcomes for patients with AIS. 31 32 Trial status Enrollment and follow-up for this study have been completed. The first patient was enrolled on 14 December 2023. Supplementary material