Background and Objectives The optimal methods for predicting early infarct growth rate (EIGR) in acute ischemic stroke with a large vessel occlusion (LVO) have not been established. We aimed to study the factors associated with EIGR, with a focus on the collateral circulation as assessed by the hypoperfusion intensity ratio (HIR) on perfusion imaging, and determine whether the associations found are consistent across imaging modalities. Methods Retrospective multicenter international study including patients with anterior circulation LVO-related acute stroke with witnessed stroke onset and baseline perfusion imaging (MRI or CT) performed within 24 hours from symptom onset. To avoid selection bias, patients were selected from (1) the prospective registries of 4 comprehensive stroke centers with systematic use of perfusion imaging and including both thrombectomy-treated and untreated patients and (2) 1 prospective thrombectomy study where perfusion imaging was acquired per protocol, but treatment decisions were made blinded to the results. EIGR was defined as infarct volume on baseline imaging divided by onset-to-imaging time and fast progressors as EIGR ≥10 mL/h. The HIR, defined as the proportion of time-to-maximum (Tmax) >6 second with Tmax >10 second volume, was measured on perfusion imaging using RAPID software. The factors independently associated with fast progression were studied using multivariable logistic regression models, with separate analyses for CT- and MRI-assessed patients. Results Overall, 1,127 patients were included (CT, n = 471; MRI, n = 656). Median age was 74 years (interquartile range [IQR] 62–83), 52% were male, median NIH Stroke Scale was 16 (IQR 9–21), median HIR was 0.42 (IQR 0.26–0.58), and 415 (37%) were fast progressors. The HIR was the primary factor associated with fast progression, with very similar results across imaging modalities: The proportion of fast progressors was 4% in the first HIR quartile (i.e., excellent collaterals), ∼15% in the second, ∼50% in the third, and ∼77% in the fourth ( p < 0.001 for each imaging modality). Fast progression was independently associated with poor 3-month functional outcome in both the CT and MRI cohorts ( p < 0.001 and p = 0.030, respectively). Discussion The HIR is the primary factor associated with fast infarct progression, regardless of imaging modality. These results have implication for neuroprotection trial design, as well as informing triage decisions at primary stroke centers.