Introduction The term malignant profile was put forward to describe acute stroke patients who are at high risk for parenchymal hemorrhage and poor outcomes following reperfusion therapies by the Diffusion and Perfusion Imaging Evaluation for Understanding Stroke Evolution (DEFUSE) investigators while studying patients treated with intravenous tissue-type plasminogen activator (IV-tPA) within 3 to 6 hours of symptom onset . It was first characterized as baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) diffusion-weighted imaging lesions greater than 100mL or perfusion-weighted MRI lesions greater than 100mL with time to maximum of tissue residue function (Tmax) contrast arrival delay of >8 seconds (Tmax >8s >100mL). This profile was subsequently refined to a perfusion weighted MRI Tmax >8s >85mL lesion using a pooled analysis of the DEFUSE and Echoplanar Imaging Thrombolytic Evaluation Trial (EPITHET) studies 1 . While MRI diffusion weighted imaging is considered the most accurate modality for estimating ischemic core infarcts, Computed Tomography Perfusion (CTP) is much more widely available than urgent MRI perfusion imaging 2 . 3 In a 2012 study of 42 patients treated with IV-tPA within 3 hours who had baseline CTP imaging, four of the patients had CTP lesions that exceeded the MRI derived prespecified lesion threshold of Tmax >8s >85mL. All four of these patients had poor outcomes at 30 days . Optimal CTP, rather than MRI perfusion, thresholds were derived using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses. A cerebral blood flow (CBF) based infarct core of greater than 53mL identified patients with poor outcomes at 30 days with 67% sensitivity and 100% specificity. ROC analyses were also used to determine optimal CTP Tmax, rather than CBF, thresholds of Tmax >6s >103mL, Tmax >8s >86mL, and Tmax >10s >78mL that were all 56% sensitive and 100% specific 4 . It is important to note that these thresholds were derived from a cohort where 32 of the patients had 8 cm of CTP anatomical coverage and 10 had 4 cm of CTP anatomical coverage. 4 Aims We aimed to validate whether the above CTP malignant profile thresholds would predict poor outcomes when applied to a new cohort of patients at a different institution. To the best of our knowledge, there are no published data to inform the selection of acute ischemic stroke lesion volume thresholds in CTP cohorts with only 4 cm of coverage. Therefore, another aim of this study was to derive via ROC analyses the optimal CBF and Tmax lesion volume thresholds to predict poor outcomes despite IV-tPA for CTP imaging with 4 cm of anatomical coverage rather than predominantly 8 cm of anatomical CTP coverage. This is of interest due to the variability in the selected thresholds across modern embolectomy trials using CTP as part of a patient selection process, with perfusion lesion thresholds ranging from 50mL to 100mL depending on the parameter used but independent of the amount of anatomical coverage available . 3 , 5 Methods Consecutive stroke patients who received intravenous tissue-type plasminogen activator within 4.5 hours of symptom onset who were imaged with CTP prior to administering IV t-PA at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) from 1999 to 2012 were reviewed retrospectively. De-identified images were processed using RAPID (version 4.5.1) software at the Stanford Stroke Center. This study was approved by the institutional review board of UCSF after coordination with the Stanford institutional review board. All patients who underwent baseline CTP imaging before receiving IV-tPA were selected for this study. Demographics, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale scores, and outcome data were obtained by chart review. A poor outcome was defined as discharge to a skilled nursing facility (SNF) or death at discharge. CT perfusion imaging was performed on a 64 rowed Lightspeed VCT scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) in cine mode (80kV, 100mA, between 55 and 59 frames per slice at 1.0 second resolution). Anatomical coverage started parallel to the orbital roof and continued above for a total of 4 cm using two separate but contiguous scans. Each of the two scans used 30 to 40mL bolus injections of Omnipaque 350 followed by 25mL of saline chaser at 4mL/s to generate 2 cm axial levels made up of four slices that were 0.5 cm in thickness. Variations in the frames per slice and bolus injection volumes were due to evolution of the protocol from 2009 to 2012, however 4 cm of anatomical coverage using 8 slices of 0.5 cm thickness remained constant throughout the study period. Retrospective perfusion parameters (regional cerebral blood flow and Tmax) were automatically computed with RAPID software using a delay-independent deconvolution approach. Stroke core was prespecified as tissue with a >70% reduction in CBF compared to normally perfused tissue . Patients whose RAPID lesion volumes exceeded any of the prespecified CTP malignant profile thresholds of CBF >53mL, TMax >6s >103mL, Tmax >8s >86mL, or Tmax >10s >78mL were identified for comparison to those who did not exceed these thresholds 4 . Fisher's Exact Tests were used to determine if exceeding these thresholds would predict poor discharge outcomes. Follow up CT and MRI scans were reviewed by a blinded neurovascular neurologist to assess for intracranial hemorrhage after IV-tPA. 4 ROC curves were generated to determine the optimal perfusion lesion volume thresholds for 4 cm of CTP brain coverage. Optimal thresholds were defined as the volumes associated with the maximum sensitivity for a poor discharge outcome while maintaining >95% specificity. The poor discharge outcome rate for patients who exceeded the 4 cm CTP coverage ROC derived thresholds was subsequently compared to those who did not exceed these thresholds. Fisher's Exact Tests were again used to determine if exceeding these newly derived thresholds would predict poor discharge outcomes. Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 22. Results Of 137 patients treated with IV-tPA within 4.5 hours of symptom onset, 111 had baseline CTP imaging. The total number of CTP scans performed for suspected acute stroke during the study period was not retrospectively available. Twenty-one patients were excluded for inadequate CTP coverage. Eight patients with infratentorial lesion were excluded. Eight were excluded for missing clinical data. Five patients were excluded for bilateral findings on RAPID not consistent with the clinical exam. Six patients were excluded for uninterpretable raw perfusion data or results. The demographics and clinical characteristics of the remaining 63 patients are listed in Table 1 . Figure 1 provides an example of a retrospective RAPID analysis for a patient who presented with a clinical left middle cerebral artery syndrome. Images were acquired at 68 minutes from stroke onset. The patient was subsequently treated with IV-tPA but died before discharge. The prevalences of patients exceeding the prespecified CTP malignant profile Tmax thresholds ranged from 7.9% to 9.5%. Only one patient exceeded the prespecified CBF threshold leading to a prevalence of only 1.6%. Table 2 provides a comparison of the discharge outcomes between patients whose CTP lesion volumes exceeded the prespecified CTP malignant profile thresholds and patients whose lesion volumes did not. The prevalence of intracerebral hemorrhage was assessed by blinded review of brain imaging available in subsequent days following the initial treatment. All patients except two had a repeat CT or MRI within 48 hours to assess for intracerebral hemorrhage; these two patients died early in their hospital courses. Recanalization was not systematically assessed since the most common form of follow up imaging was a non-contrast head CT within 24 hours of IV-tPA administration. The rates of parenchymal hematoma type 1 (PH1) or parenchymal hematoma type 2 (PH2) on follow-up imaging were calculated for each threshold ( Tables 3 and 4 ). A single patient suffered PH2. None of the patients with CTP lesions exceeding a perfusion threshold suffered PH2. ROC analyses derived optimal Tmax thresholds were 100mL for Tmax >6s (33% sensitivity and 96.1% specificity, AUC 0.80), 65mL for Tmax >8s (41.7% sensitivity and 96.1% specificity, AUC 0.79), and 45mL for Tmax >10s (50% sensitivity and 96.1% specificity, AUC 0.78). Attempts to threshold towards 100% specificity led to larger volume thresholds with significantly lower sensitivities. The optimal CBF threshold for 4 cm CTP brain coverage was 39mL (33% sensitivity and 100% specificity, AUC 0.72). The prevalences of patients exceeding the ROC derived 4 cm CTP thresholds ranged between 6.3% and 12.3%. The 4 cm CTP coverage ROC derived perfusion lesion thresholds were all smaller volumes than the published predominantly 8 cm derived thresholds and predicted poor discharge outcomes with statistical significance. The new 39mL CBF core threshold gained statistical significance by detecting 3 additional patients with poor outcomes without generating false positives. Table 5 compares the discharge outcomes between patients whose 4 cm CTP coverage lesion volumes exceeded the new 4 cm ROC derived lesion volume thresholds and patients whose lesion volumes did not exceed them. Discussion The first aim of this retrospective study was to validate the ability of the predominantly 8 cm derived CTP malignant profile CBF and Tmax lesion volume thresholds to predict poor clinical outcomes despite IV-tPA treatment. We found that patients from an independent CTP cohort whose lesion volumes exceeded the prespecified thresholds of Tmax >6s >103mL, Tmax >8s >86mL, or Tmax >10s >78mL were significantly more likely to suffer poor outcomes despite treatment with IV-tPA despite assessment with only 4 cm of CTP anatomical coverage. The prespecified CBF core >53mL lesion volume threshold was only exceeded by one patient in this study despite a larger sample size. While this made the CBF parameter 100% specific for predicting a poor outcome, it did not reach statistical significance. In contrast, five out of 42 patients in the original cohort exceeded their ROC derived CBF threshold of 53mL (67% sensitivity and 100% specificity), providing a statistically significant association with poor outcomes . 4 The second aim of this study was to use ROC curves to determine the ideal thresholds for 4 cm of CTP coverage, instead of 8 cm coverage, that would predict poor clinical outcomes despite IV-tPA treatment. These ROC analyses produced a CBF core lesion volume threshold of >39mL (33% sensitivity and 100% specificity) that was statistically significantly associated with poor outcomes. One possible explanation for this is that CBF lesions greater than 53mL are less likely to be detected with 4 cm rather than 8 cm of CTP coverage. However, this hypothesis does not fully explain why the 4 cm of CTP coverage in this study was able to detect similar prevalences of patients with larger Tmax lesions. ROC analyses of the Tmax data yielded lower thresholds for 4 cm of CTP coverage that retained the ability to predict poor outcomes despite IV-tPA with statistical significance. There are important limitations to this retrospective study. The absence of a control group and small sample size limit the statistical conclusions. Despite validating the majority of the CTP thresholds from a retrospective study that used a separate cohort, both cohorts were treated before modern thrombectomy devices became available. These findings should not be used to withhold IV-tPA treatment from eligible patients within the 4.5 hour time window. Both cohorts used RAPID software to automatically calculate perfusion parameters. Therefore, these findings may not apply to different perfusion analysis systems. Perhaps the most clinically significant limitation of this study is the lack of availability of reperfusion status of each patient after treatment. Fortunately the interactions of CTP thresholds, reperfusion status, and outcomes are better addressed in the existing secondary analysis of the prospective SWIFT PRIME study . 3 In summary, we found that 4 cm of CTP coverage could use any of the previously published Tmax, but not CBF, thresholds that were derived from predominantly 8 cm of CTP coverage to adequately identify patients with poor outcomes despite IV-tPA treatment. ROC analyses provided smaller Tmax and CBF thresholds for 4 cm of CTP coverage that could do the same. None of the thresholds were able to predict clinically significant intracerebral hemorrhage in this 4 cm CTP cohort. Overall, the higher sensitivity with equal specificity of 8 cm of CTP coverage, and its use in successful prospective interventional trials, argues in favor of using 8 cm of CTP coverage when available. In settings where only 4 cm of CTP coverage is available, the data above represent a starting point in defining CTP lesions that may be used to predict poor outcomes despite IV-tPA.