Introduction Approximately 30% ischemic strokes are due to large vessel occlusions. Nearly 25% of these patients develop rapid infarct growth in the first few hours of anterior circulation large vessel occlusion and are known as ‘fast progressors’.( 1 ) CT ASPECTS (Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score) is a 10-point scoring system of early ischemic changes in ten distinct anterior circulation brain regions which serves as a surrogate of infarct core volume and is known to correlate with clinical outcomes.( 2 ) Based on randomized trials, current AHA guidelines recommend CT ASPECTS ≥6 as the eligibility criterion for endovascular thrombectomy (EVT).( 3 ) The number of transferred patients over the years has considerably increased with the increasing use of telemedicine for evaluation of stroke patients.( 4 ) Infarct progression in terms of CT ASPECTS ‘decay’ is particularly relevant in patients initially seen at a referring community hospital over telemedicine and eventually transferred to an EVT capable center. Identifying factors associated with rapid infarct progression can help optimize stroke systems of care, determine candidates for direct angio-suite transfer on hub arrival and avoid ‘futile’ transfers. Moreover, identification of factors influencing infarct progression can help determine targets for future interventions to prevent core expansion while patients are being transferred. In this study, we sought to identify demographic, clinical and radiological factors associated with rapid infarct progression and its subsequent effect on long term clinical outcomes in a telemedicine transfer population of patients with large artery occlusion. Methods Study Design We analyzed patients in our prospectively maintained registry within a large 17 hospital tele-stroke network based in the Greater Houston region. Our telemedicine program maintains a registry of all consultations performed on patients presenting with suspected stroke to network hospitals in Texas. The Lone Star Stroke Consortium Telestroke Registry (LesTeR) registry has established policies and procedures that dictate how data are gathered.( 5 ) Telestroke consultation with 24/7 availability was provided by an academic hub and comprehensive stroke center, to sites by either a board-certified stroke attending physician, a board-eligible stroke attending physician, or a fellow who had completed a neurology residency and was in a neurovascular training program with attending supervision. Patients included were transferred for EVT evaluation from a referring community spoke hospital (RH) to our comprehensive stroke center (CSC) between September 2015 and September 2019. Institutional review board approval was obtained with waiver of informed consent. Study population and variables Patients with anterior circulation large vessel occlusion (internal carotid or ICA or middle cerebral artery or MCA or tandem occlusion) within 24 hours of symptom onset were included in the study. Patients with hemorrhagic transformation on arrival to CSC, posterior circulation stroke, anterior cerebral artery occlusion, established large core (CT ASPECTS <6) on arrival to the RH and direct angio-suite transfers on arrival to the CSC were excluded from final analysis ( Figure 1 ). Demographic (age, gender, baseline mRS, race/ethnicity), clinical (vascular risk factors, past medical history, blood glucose, systolic, diastolic, mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) at the RH and the CSC and delta MAP (difference between MAP at the CSC and the RH), NIHSS on presentation, prior use of anti-thrombotic, IV-tPA administration prior to transfer, mechanical thrombectomy metrics on CSC arrival and final mTICI score) were collected. Time metrics including last known well (LKW), arrival to RH, imaging at RH, IV-tPA administration time, arrival to CSC and time to groin puncture were recorded. Early time window was defined as 0–6 hours from LKW to hub arrival and late time window as 6–24 hours from LKW to hub arrival. Neuroimaging variables included were CT ASPECTS at the RH and CSC, presence of hyperdense sign on CT at the RH, clot location (internal carotid artery, M1/M2/M3/M4-segments of middle cerebral artery, or tandem occlusions) and collateral score as determined by computed tomography angiography done at the CSC and reviewed by two neuroradiologists (EF, OA). Maas and colleagues’ criteria was used for collateral scoring as follows: 1, absent collateral blood flow or less than 50% of the middle cerebral artery territory (no or poor); 2, collateral blood flow less than that on the contralateral side but more than 50% of the middle cerebral artery territory (moderate); 3, collateral blood flow equal to that on the contralateral side (adequate); and 4, collateral blood flow greater than that on the contralateral side.( 6 ) Ground and air distance from the RH to CSC, mode of transfer (air or ground transport) and workflow time metrics were recorded. Transfer time was defined as time from CT acquisitions at the RH to arrival at CSC. Absolute rate of aspects decay was calculated as (Hub aspects-RH aspects/transfer time in hours). Study outcomes Patients were divided into two groups, fast progressors and slow progressors. Fast progressors were patients that had a decay in CT ASPECTS during transfer, defined as a score of ≥6 at the RH and <6 at the CSC, whereas slow progressors maintained CT ASPECTS ≥6 on arrival to the CSC. Prevalence of both groups and factors associated with fast progression were identified. As a secondary outcome, we analyzed factors associated with >2-point drop in CT ASPECTS during transfer. Good outcomes were defined as mRS 0–2 at 90 days. Factors associated with good outcomes were identified. Statistical analysis Demographic information, baseline characteristics are reported by frequency and percentage for categorical variables, mean and standard deviations for continuous variables with normal distribution, and median and interquartile ranges for continuous variables with skewed distribution. Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test were conducted to compare distributions of sociodemographic characteristics. Two-sided P values were reported; P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. Univariable and Multivariable logistic regression models were used to determine factors that were independently associated with ASPECTS decay and >2-point drop in CT ASPECTS, with p value <0.05 considered significant. Univariable and Multivariable logistic regression models were used to determine factors that were independently associated with good outcome (mRS 0–2) at 90 days with p value <0.05 considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed by using the SAS software (version 9.4, the SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Results Baseline characteristics We identified 190 patients with anterior circulation large vessel occlusion meeting our inclusion criteria eligible for final analysis. Reasons for exclusion are summarized in study flowchart ( Figure 1 ). Overall, in the transfer group there were 94 (50%) men, median (IQR) age was 68 (57, 78) years and median (IQR) baseline stroke severity (NIHSS) was 16.0 (13.0, 22.0) points. Median (IQR) CT ASPECTS at the RH was 10 ( 9 , 10 ). Median transfer time in the overall cohort was 2.8 (2.2, 3.4) hours. Other baseline variables are summarized in Table 1 . Infarct Progression Of the 190 patients, 44 (23%) patients underwent rapid infarct progression. Among the 150 (79%) early window (0–6 hours from LKW) patients, there were 38 (25%) fast progressors and 112 (75%) slow progressors, whereas in the 40 (21%) late window (6–24 hours from LKW) patients, there were 6 (15%) fast progressors and 34 (85%) slow progressors. Table 1 shows comparison of characteristics by speed of infarct progression. Notably, fast progressors were more likely to have higher stroke severity on presentation (NIHSS) [median (IQR), 19.0 (16.0, 24.0) vs.15.5 (11.0, 21.0), p <0.001] and have poorer collateral circulation (CS 0–1) [ N (%), 35 (80%) vs. 45 (31%), p= <0.01] when compared to slow progressors. Twenty-nine (66%) fast progressors had early ischemic changes on CT brain (ASPECTS 6–9) when they arrived at the referring hospital compared to 54 (37%) slow progressor patients (p<0.001). Compared to slow progressors, fast progressors demonstrated a higher absolute rate of ASPECTS decay [median (IQR), 0.5 (0.0, 0.9) vs. 1.8 (1.3, 2.4), p<0.0001]. Median (IQR) transfer times in both groups was similar [Fast vs. slow progressors, 2.8 (2.2, 3.2) vs. 2.8 (2.2, 3.4) hours, p=0.94]. There were no significant differences in the median systolic blood pressure [Fast vs. slow progressors, 140.0 (129.0, 165.0) vs. 148.0 (131.0, 164.0), p=0.39] and blood glucose [Fast vs. slow progressors, 120.5 (108.5, 169.5) vs.122.5 (100.0, 156.0) mg/dL, p=0.35] in both groups. Reperfusion therapy IV-tPA was administered to 131 (69%) patients at the RH prior to transfer with median (IQR) onset to needle time of 1.8 (1.3, 2.6) hours. Thirty-three (25%) of which were fast progressors and 98 (75%) slow progressors. Median (IQR) onset to needle time was significantly shorter in slow progressors compared to fast progressors [2.0 (1.5, 3.2) vs. 1.7 (1.3, 2.5) hours, p<0.05]. EVT was performed in total 76 (40%) patients on hub arrival, of which 68 (89%) were slow progressors and 8 (11%) were fast progressors. Factors associated with fast progression In an adjusted multivariable logistic regression model, we identified higher stroke severity at presentation [aOR, 1.096, 95 % CI,1.023, 1.174, p=0.009] and presence of early ischemic changes (CT ASPECT 6–9) at the RH [aOR, 2.721, 95% CI, 1.22, 6.071, p=0.014] to be positively associated, whereas prior ischemic stroke [aOR, 0.272, 95% CI,0.078, 0.948, p=0.04] and higher collateral score ( 2 , 3 , 4 ) [aOR, 0.138, 95%CI, 0.059, 0.324, p=<0.0001] to be negatively associated with rapid infarct progression (score of =6 at the RH and <6 at the CSC) ( Table 2 ). Neither transfer time nor use of IV t-PA were significant in the univariable models. The secondary outcome of >2-point drop in CT ASPECTS during transfer was noted in 115 (61%) patients. Adjusted multivariable logistic regression model identified higher collateral score (aOR, 0.25, 95% CI, 0.122, 0.512, p=0.0001) and prior ischemic stroke (aOR,0.195, 95% CI, 0.076, 0.496, p=0.0006) to be negatively associated and higher stroke severity (aOR, 1.106, 95% CI, 1.048, 1.169, p=0.0003) to be positively associated with >2-point drop in CT ASPECTS during transfer ( Table 2 ). Transfer time was not associated (aOR,1.357, 95% CI, 0.994,1.851, p=0.054) with >2-point drop in CT ASPECTS. Clinical outcomes Overall, fifty-eight (31%) patients transferred to our CSC for EVT evaluation had good outcomes (mRS 02) at 90 days. Only three patients (7%) with rapid infarct progression had a good outcome compared to 55 (38%) slow progressors, p<0.001. Multivariable regression, adjusted for reperfusion status, identified age [aOR, 0.96, 95% CI, 0.93 – 0.98; p= <0.001], initial stroke severity [aOR, 0.87, 95% CI, 0.81 – 0.93; p=<0.001 ], absolute rate of decrease in CT ASPECTS [aOR, 0.38, 95% CI, 0.19 – 0.77; p=0.007]and internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion [aOR, 0.34, 95 %CI, 0.12 – 0.94; p=0.038] as significant negative predictors of good outcome at 90 days ( Table 2 ). Discussion Our findings show that approximately 23% patients evaluated over telemedicine for suspected large vessel occlusion and initially imaging eligible for EVT at the RH develop rapid infarct progression by the time of CSC arrival and irrespective of reperfusion status, patients with rapid infarct progression are less likely to have good clinical outcome at 90 days. Prior work assessing the prevalence of fast progressors in patients presenting directly to a comprehensive stroke center has determined rapid infarct progression to occur in 20% patients. ( 7 ) The proportion of fast progressors identified in our transfer cohort (23%) is similar to patients presenting directly to a CSC. Higher stroke severity, presence of early ischemic changes at the referring hospital, absence of prior stroke and poor collaterals are associated with rapid infarct progression during transfer. When rapid progression was re-examined by defining as CT ASPECTS >2-point difference between the RH and CSC, we found very similar results. Irrespective of reperfusion therapy, higher age, stroke severity at presentation, higher absolute rate of decrease in CT ASPECTS and ICA occlusion are associated with long term clinical outcomes. Dynamic interaction between numerous physiological variables determines infarct progression. Collateral blood flow status and prior stroke have been postulated to influence infarct progression. A recent study by Seo et al. also determined high collateral score and prior ischemic stroke are associated with slower infarct progression. ( 8 ) However, their study was not specific to the transfer population in which decisions need to be made quickly to transport a patient out of one hospital to another. Additionally, they utilized advanced perfusion imaging to determine infarct core in their study which is not readily available at most referring primary stroke centers. Our study, specific to the transfer cohort, utilizes simple non-contrast CT imaging to determine infarct core and attempts to answer the practical question of determining infarct progression during transfer. Our findings are also comparable to those by Boulouis et al. who found lower baseline CT ASPECTS and collateral status to be important predictors of infarct progression in patients initially seen at referring hospitals. ( 9 ) In keeping with their study, time elapsed during transfer did not have a significant effect on infarct progression in our study. Blood glucose, blood pressure, transfer time and distance have been hypothesized to influence sustainability of collateral status and consequently infarct progression. Even though we did not find any significant influence of these variables on infarct progression, some of these variables (blood glucose and blood pressure) are dynamically changing and given the retrospective nature of our study are only captured in snapshots. Unlike their study, we did not find dense vessel sign to be a predictor which could be due to a relatively smaller sample size. Consistent with prior studies, we found stroke severity was a significant predictor of ASPECTS decay.( 10 ) However, this study did not assess the impact of infarct progression on clinical outcomes. Sun et al. investigated the predictors of clinical outcome and found the absolute rate of ASPECTS decay as a significant predictor of good outcomes in patients undergoing mechanical thrombectomy. ( 11 ) However, neither of these studies accounted for collateral score, blood pressure and blood glucose status. In our cohort, for every one-unit increase in the absolute rate of ASPECTS decay, we expect to see 62% decreased odds of functional independence at 90 days. Data from a HERMES meta-analysis, the THRACE trial and other retrospective studies have raised the question of benefit of thrombolysis in patients with large vessel occlusion.( 12 , 13 ) While it is possible thrombolysis may not be instrumental in complete recanalization of large vessel occlusion, as evidenced by our results, earlier onset to needle times may offer some benefit in slowing infarct progression during transfer. While the recent results of the DIRECT-MT study showed non-inferiority of thrombectomy over bridging therapy with thrombolysis in patients with anterior circulation large vessel occlusion, they did not include transfer patients and the majority of the patients had not completed tPA infusion.( 14 ) If the current ongoing trials such as SWIFTDIRECT evaluating direct mechanical thrombectomy compared to bridging therapy with IV t-PA and EVT in patients with large vessel occlusion are positive, it will become prudent to identify fast progressors to facilitate immediate transfer without spending additional time on thrombolysis.( 15 ) Tenecteplase has also shown promising results in recent trials of large vessel occlusion and has the advantage of bolus dosing over tPA.( 16 ) Due to the time delays associated with the transfer process, differentiating between fast and slow progressors in the transfer cohort has significant implications when patients are evaluated over telemedicine and subsequently transferred to a CSC. With the basic information of clinical severity, non-contrast CT scan and vessel imaging, our study results can help triaging physicians identify patients who could possibly benefit from direct angio-suite transfer, which has shown promising results in prior retrospective studies ( 17 , 18 ) and is currently being studied in prospective manner in a randomized control trial.( 19 ) Major strength of our study is the assessment of all imaging studies by our core lab composed of two neuroradiologists and the inclusion of most known clinical and radiological variables in the regression model. However, it is known there is a wide inter-rater variability in ASPECTS interpretation, and we did not assess for inter-rater variability as the cohort was divided between the two radiologists for interpretation. Another limitation of our study is that we utilized vessel imaging performed at the CSC as a surrogate of clot location and collaterals status when patients present at the referring hospital. It is possible that some patients had distal clot migration due to thrombolysis or recanalization which was not taken into account in our study. Moreover, we utilized single phase CTA imaging which may not be accurate in determining collateral status. Nevertheless, our results emphasize the importance of initiating vessel imaging at community hospitals given its subsequent treatment decision implications and can help in assessing clot burden and visualizing vessel anatomy for procedure planning. A recent cost-effective analysis study by Wu et al. on screening for large-vessel occlusion with CT angiography in patients with acute minor stroke showed it is cost-effective and associated with improved health outcomes.( 20 ) We recognize infarct core is a moving target and ongoing studies of thrombectomy in large core could redefine ASPECTS thresholds.( 21 – 23 ) Conclusion Higher stroke severity, presence of early ischemic changes at the referring facility, absence of prior stroke and poor collaterals scores are factors associated with rapid infarct progression in the telemedicine transfer cohort. Additionally, irrespective of reperfusion status, increasing age, higher stroke severity at presentation, higher absolute rate of decrease in CT ASPECTS during inter-facility transfer and ICA occlusion are associated with poor clinical outcomes at 90 days. We plan to develop and externally validate a scoring system based on these variables to identify fast progressors in an effort to optimize stroke systems of care and determine patients eligible for direct angio-suite transfers.