Introduction The brain is exquisitely vulnerable to ischemia, which poses a major challenge in acute ischemic stroke care, because any delay in the implementation of therapies aimed at mitigating tissue injury is associated with substantial reduction in treatment efficacy. For example, it has been estimated that every 1-s delay to reperfusion results in a loss of 2.2 h of healthy life. Accordingly, treatment aimed at delaying infarct progression until definite reperfusion can be achieved by pharmacological or mechanical means is a highly promising strategy to maximize the treatment efficacy and improve patient outcomes. 1 Due to high oxygen demand of brain tissues, increasing oxygen levels in severely ischemic tissues may delay progression of the tissue at risk (penumbra) towards infarction. Several clinical studies investigated the potential beneficial effect of supplemental inhaled oxygen in acute stroke; yet despite promising results in small pilot studies, inhaled oxygen supplementation has not translated to improved functional outcomes in large prospective trials. 2 , 3 There is controversy whether indiscriminate oxygen delivery could promote injury to non-hypoxic tissues such as through free oxygen radical formation, 4 – 6 pulmonary toxicity, and oxygen mediated adverse effects on vascular tone and blood pressure. 4 To overcome this issue, selective delivery of oxygen to ischemic tissues is desirable. 7 , 8 2 In this study, we present results from using an oxygen carrier, Omniox-Ischemic Stroke (OMX-IS, Omniox, Palo Alto, CA, USA), to attenuate ischemic lesion progression in an established dog permanent large vessel occlusion (LVO) stroke model. OMX-IS is a protein oxygen carrier derived from a member of the heme-nitric oxide/oxygen (H-NOX) protein family that is engineered to specifically deliver oxygen to hypoxic tissues without increasing oxygen levels in normoxic tissues. The delivery of oxygen by the heme protein containing OMX-IS is determined by ligand binding kinetics and is a function of the affinity of the heme protein for oxygen and the local concentration of oxygen in the target tissue. Because of OMX-IS’s high oxygen affinity (dissociation constant K 9 D of ~2.4 μM compared to ~30 μM for hemoglobin) oxygen remains bound to it in deoxygenated blood in normoxic tissues, and is only released in ischemic tissue that has a much lower oxygen concentration. Following oxygen delivery within the hypoxic capillary environment, the unbound oxygen carrier circulates to the lungs to rebind oxygen, thereby allowing recirculation and sustained targeted oxygen-delivery to hypoxic tissues while avoiding the risk for potentially harmful hyperoxygenation of non-ischemic tissues. 10 , 11 In addition, OMX-IS has the potential benefit of reducing ischemia reperfusion injury by reducing metabolite accumulation during ischemia. 3 , 10 , 11 12 The specific goal of this study was to determine whether OMX-IS delays infarct evolution in a dog embolic LVO model. To this end, we utilized serial diffusion-weighted (DW) MRI to examine the ability of an OMX-IS oxygen carrier to delay infarct growth as measured by the time needed to reach 50% of the maximum predicted infarct volume as previously defined using perfusion-weighted (PW) MRI. 13 Materials and Methods Data availability The data presented in this work are available on reasonable request. OMX-IS production The protein component of OMX-IS was produced as a bulk substance prepared using E. coli cell culture and standard procedures for downstream processing. PEGylated and non-PEGylated versions were formulated in aqueous buffers to produce the OMX-IS versions described here. Product quality and safety were ensured by testing against pre-determined specifications prior to use in animal studies. OMX-IS is stored frozen at −80°C and thawed before use. The buffers used to formulate OMX-IS served as vehicle for control experiments. Animal preparation All animal research procedures were performed as approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Thirty-three purpose-bred mongrel dogs (13 females and 20 males; weight: 18.7–31.7 kg; age: 5–11 months) were used in this study. Details of the animal demographics are shown in Tables S1 and S2 . The animals were fasted for 8 h prior to the procedure. On the day of surgery, animals were sedated and pre-treated with a single dose of intramuscular acepromazine (0.06 mg/kg), buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg), and glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg). Propofol (3–4 mg/kg) was given intravenously to induce anesthesia, and the animal was intubated for mechanical ventilation (10–12 breaths/min). Anesthesia was maintained with 1–3% isoflurane in medical air (volume was pressure dependent, not to exceed 20 cm H 2 O) throughout surgery and MRI. The animals were monitored by ECG, peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (spO 2 ), end-tidal CO 2 , invasive arterial blood pressure, and rectal temperature throughout anesthesia. The vital measurements were all maintained within the physiological range. Blood gas analysis was performed throughout the procedure at approximately 30-min intervals using an i-STAT blood analyzer (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA) using CG8+ cartridges (Abaxis, Union City, CA, USA) to assess pH, pCO 2 , pO 2 , BEecf, HCO 3 , TCO 2 , sO 2 , glucose, Na, K, iCa, hemoglobin, and hematocrit levels (details and definitions in Table S3 ). An 8F hemostatic introducer was placed in the right femoral artery for endovascular access and blood draws to prepare blood clots as described previously. A 6-french Navien-072 catheter (Medtronic Neurovascular, Irvine, CA) was navigated under fluoroscopic guidance to the origin of the left internal carotid artery (ICA), at which point an autologous clot 14 was injected to permanently occlude the middle cerebral artery (MCA) at its origin. Upon confirmation of correct clot placement by catheter angiography (Allura Xper FD20; Philips Healthcare, Best, the Netherlands), the animal was transferred to the adjacent MRI scanner. 14 Imaging protocol MRI was performed on a 3T system (Phillips Achieva/Phillips Ingenia 3T, Philips Healthcare). A 16-channel knee coil (Philips Healthcare) was used to acquire the brain scans. The imaging protocol included time-of-flight (ToF) imaging (repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE)=20/4 ms, flip angle (FA)=20°, matrix=332×212), DW-MRI (TR/TE=2600/76 ms, FA=90°, b-value=0, 1000 s/mm 2 , number of signal averages (NSA)=6, matrix=144×144), PW-MRI (TR/TE=1500/20.1 ms, FA=40°, 60 dynamics, matrix=320×320), T2-weighted FLAIR imaging (TR/TE=11000/125 ms, inversion time=2800 ms, FA=90°, echo train length (ETL)=27, matrix=288×288) and susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) (Fast Field Echo based sequence, TR/TE=31/7.2 ms, ETL=4, matrix=480×480, NSA=2). SWI was used to rule out the possibility of hemorrhage. For PW-MRI, 0.2 mmol/kg of gadobutrol (Gadavist, Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, Leverkusen, Germany) was injected intravenously (IV) via the femoral catheter after the second of 60 dynamic scans (total scan time=90 s). Fast and slow evolver determination We used a refinement of the previously described binning mechanism of relative time-to-peak (rTTP) map histograms to predict whether stroke evolution would be fast or slow. In brief, rTTP maps were generated from PW-MRI images using MATLAB (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA) and all voxels within the brain region of interest (ROI) with a delay greater than 4.5 s relative to the contralateral hemisphere were considered to be destined for infarction. Post-processing motion correction step was applied to compensate for any bulk motion during the dynamic PW-MRI. The following scheme was used to bin voxels in the rTTP maps to assign the dogs as fast or slow evolvers: (a) if ≥50% of the voxels in the rTTP map displayed a delay less than or equal to 6 s, then the dog was designated as a slow evolver (rTTP 13 ≤6s ); (b) if ≥50% of the voxels displayed a delay greater than 6 s, then the dog was designated as a fast evolver (rTTP >6s ). OMX-IS treatment regimen Immediately following the first PW-MRI, animals were stratified according to the predicted stroke evolution pattern (fast versus slow evolver) and received either OMX-IS (test article) or vehicle ( Fig. 1 ). To test multiple OMX-IS formulations for their effectiveness in this model, we used three OMX-IS treatment regimens: OMX-4.80 (150 mg/kg), OMX-4.80P (150 mg/kg), and OMX-4.80P (75 mg/kg). In the first two regimens we compared OMX-4.80 and OMX-4.80P (a formulation of OMX-4.80 PEGylated for longer circulation half-life) when administered at 150 mg/kg by an IV bolus (8 ml/min) via the femoral vein at ~45 min post-MCA occlusion (MCAO) followed by slow infusion (40 ml/h) for ~2 h. For the third drug regimen (OMX-4.80P 75 mg/kg), a single IV injection of OMX-4.80P was administered via the femoral vein at 45 min post-MCAO over a period of ~15 min (5 ml/min) to test whether a lower dose of OMX-4.80P was capable of supporting brain tissue viability when given as a short infusion. Control dogs were treated in a similar manner with vehicle consisting of OMX-IS formulation buffer without the oxygen carrier. To improve the statistical power of this study, we enriched our cohort with 13 historical controls (6 fast and 7 slow evolvers) that received serial DW-MRI in accordance with our protocol. DW-MRI was obtained approximately every half hour up to 5 h post-MCAO. To calculate the infarct core volume, apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps were generated from the DW-MRI images. To confirm the final infarct size, animals were euthanized using pentobarbitol (IV, 390 mg/kg) following the acquisition of the final diffusion image, and brains harvested immediately for histological assessment using triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC). 14 , 15 Image analysis of infarct size and evolution To calculate the true infarct volume and rate of infarct evolution, ADC maps were generated from DW-MRI images using MATLAB. All voxels within the brain ROI below the threshold of 0.533×10 −3 mm 2 /s were designated as infarcted tissue. The volume based on rTTP maps of PW-MRI images was then used to normalize the ADC derived infarct volumes. Since this study sought to examine drug effects, prior to the normalization, the ADC-derived infarct volumes at all time-points were subtracted from the 30 min infarct volume, effectively setting the initial infarct volume to zero just prior to drug administration. The infarct evolution curves were then fit using a Boltzmann sigmoid function to calculate the half-time constant (HTC) using the following equation: 15 I n f a r c t _ V o l u m e n o r m = 1 1 + e H T C − t m Infarct_Volume is the normalized infarct volume, norm t is the time post-MCAO, HTC is the half-time constant, i.e. the time to reach 50% of the final infarct volume, and m is the slope. Final infarct determination The ADC-thresholded core at the final imaging time-point was assessed to determine the final infarct volume, which has been shown to have a strong correlation with histology-determined infarct size. The brains of all animals were collected to assess the final infarct volume using TTC staining. Following extraction, brains were placed at −80°C for ~20 min and then cut into ~5-mm thick sections. Each section was stained with TTC for final infarct volume assessment, 16 which was measured manually using ImageJ (version 1.52). 14 17 OMX-IS ELISA and pharmacokinetic analysis Blood was collected at 5, 30-, 90-, 150-, and 210-min post-administration of the test article. Serum concentrations of OMX-IS in dogs were measured by an ELISA developed by Omniox. Briefly, serum samples were diluted and incubated in 96-well plates pre-coated with anti-OMX capturing antibody (mouse monoclonal antibody, clone M6, generated by Omniox), washed and probed with goat anti-OMX polyclonal antibody (generated by Omniox) followed by peroxidase conjugated affinity purified rabbit anti-goat IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Cat. No. 305-035-045). OMX-IS concentrations in serum were calculated from the 4-parameter logistic regression standard curve for OMX-IS. Pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated using a non-compartmental approach consistent with the IV infusion route of administration. All parameters were generated from OMX-IS individual concentrations. The concentration at time zero was assumed to be zero for the purpose of parameter estimation. Concentration values reported as below the quantitation limit were assigned a value of zero. Statistical analysis All statistical analyses were done in GraphPad Prism (V9.0.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). For demographic and physiological data, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to identify any differences between the fast and slow evolvers. Two-tailed unpaired parametric t-test with Welch’s correction was used to check for significant differences in all parameters between groups that passed the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. For data sets that did not pass the normality test, 2-tailed unpaired non-parametric t-test with Mann-Whitney correction was used. For the infarct evolution comparisons, ANOVA with mixed models was used to determine whether there was a significant difference in infarct growth over time between the fast and slow evolvers; a post-hoc Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test was used to identify the time-points that showed significant differences. For the comparison between ADC- and TTC-measured infarct volumes, a paired t-test was used. A 2-sided P <0.05 was considered significant in all analyses. Results MCA occlusion Of the 33 dogs in this study, permanent embolic MCAO was successfully induced in 32 dogs. One dog experienced spontaneous recanalization within 2 h post-MCAO and was excluded from the study. Of the remaining dogs, 17 were classified as fast evolvers and 15 as slow evolvers. MCAO was confirmed by digital subtraction angiography. Persistent MCAO was confirmed by serial ToF-MRI in each animal. None of the dogs displayed any hemorrhagic transformation. There was no significant difference in the demographics (sex, age, and weight) between fast and slow evolvers ( Tables S1 and S2 ). In general, there was no significant difference in vital measurements between groups ( Table S3 ). The only exception was the difference in the respiration rate and end tidal CO 2 in the fast control group which was mainly affected by a single animal that exhibited transient end tidal CO 2 elevation, which was compensated by adjusting the respiration rate resulting in consistent blood gas values that remained within normal limits. Pharmacokinetic analysis of OMX-IS drug regimens For the duration of the experiment, there was no significant difference in the pharmacokinetics between the different OMX-IS drug regimens ( Fig. S1 ). Hence, all OMX-IS treatment groups were combined for the main analyses unless otherwise stated. Data analysis of individual OMX-IS drug regimens are in the Supplemental Figures . PW-MRI-predicted infarct progression (fast vs. slow evolution) All dogs could be unequivocally assigned to fast or slow evolver groups ( Table S1 ). At the conclusion of the experiments, the rTTP-based categorization was validated by comparing it to the true ADC infarct evolution confirming correct assignment of all animals to the fast and slow evolver groups. Fig. 2A depicts the initial PW-MRI lesion volumes (predicted final infarct volume) for all control and OMX-IS treated dogs as stratified by the OMX-IS treatments and predicted stroke evolution pattern. Figs. 2B and 2C compare the initial perfusion lesion volumes between the control and OMX-IS treated groups irrespective of the formulation and dose. There was no significant difference in the initial perfusion lesion volumes between OMX-IS versus vehicle treated groups for the fast evolvers ( Fig. 2A ). However, in the slow evolver group, controls had significantly larger initial perfusion lesion volumes versus two of the OMX-IS treated groups ( Fig. 2A ). The initial perfusion lesion volumes varied considerably within the control group (200–9000 mm 3 ) compared to the OMX-IS treated groups (60–3000 mm 3 , Fig. 2B ), which were primarily comprised of dogs with relatively small predicted final infarct volumes (<2000 mm 3 ). To remove this imbalance, we excluded both very small and very large infarct volumes by using the 95% confidence interval of the mean of the control group. Retained in our analysis were predicted final infarct volumes within the range of 1850 mm 3 to 6000 mm 3 (4 controls and 4 OMX-IS treated animals). We found no significant differences in perfusion lesion size between the control and combined OMX-IS treatment groups ( Fig. 2C ). Notably, as would be expected for a permanent MCAO model, the predicted tissue destined for infarction by PW-MRI was congruent with the final infarct volume on DW-MRI ( Figs. 2D , 2E , and 2F ). Infarct evolution Infarct evolution in OMX-IS treated dogs was delayed relative to controls for both fast and slow progressors as assessed by non-normalized ( Figs. 3 , 4 and 5A ) as well as normalized ADC infarct volumes ( Fig. 5B ). In fast evolvers, OMX-IS significantly reduced the rate of infarct progression ( Fig. 5B , P <0.0001) and the final infarct size was not reached by 5 h post-MCAO. Among slow progressors, OMX-IS treatment was associated with a reduced infarct progression rate, but this effect did not reach significance ( P =0.09), and the final infarct size was reached by 5 h post-MCAO. The resulting time delay (denoted by the time needed to reach 50% of the final infarct volume) of infarct growth in OMX-IS treated animals was ~60 min for fast evolvers compared to ~45 min for slow evolvers ( Fig. 5B ). Case level overlays of non-normalized and normalized ADC infarct volumes of individual dogs are shown for the control and treated groups of both fast and slow evolvers in Figs. S2 and S3 . Fig. 5C depicts the Boltzmann sigmoid curve-fits for the fast and slow evolver data (compare Fig. 5B ) to quantify the rate of infarct growth for all groups. In fast evolvers, a significant delay in HTC (by 58 min, P <0.0001) was observed with combined OMX-IS drug effects ( Fig. 5D ) compared to controls. Likewise, OMX-IS delayed lesion evolution by 43 min in the slow evolver group; however, this effect did not reach significance ( P =0.06) probably due to low animal numbers in the slow evolvers that passed the inclusion criteria. The effects of individual OMX-IS drug regimens on the HTC are included in Fig. S4-A . There was a significant reduction in the final infarct volume at 5 h post-MCAO (as assessed by the ADC-defined infarct normalized to the initial perfusion lesion volume) in the fast evolver OMX-IS treatment group compared to that of the control group ( Fig. 5E , 0.88 vs. 0.99, OMX-IS drug vs. control, P <0.0001). There was no difference between treated and control groups in the slow evolvers (0.93 vs. 0.95, OMX-IS drug vs. control, P= 0.34). The effects of individual OMX-IS drug regimens on the final normalized ADC infarct volume are shown in Fig. S4-B . Ex vivo infarct assessment All TTC-defined infarct volumes from the histological samples showed good agreement with the final ADC infarct volume from DW-MRI images based on a Bland-Altmann analysis (bias: 1.33%; 95% CI: −15–18%) with an average difference of 6.3% (58 mm 3 ) without significant difference ( P =0.42, paired t-test) between the TTC- versus ADC-defined final infarct volumes ( Fig. S5 ). Discussion Timely treatment of stroke patients is not always possible, e.g., when patients with LVO present to a center that is not capable for mechanical thrombectomy and therefore, require transfer to a different hospital. Because even small delays to recanalization diminish the likelihood of achieving a good clinical outcome , novel approaches to neuroprotection with the goal of delaying infarct progression while awaiting definitive reperfusion are highly promising to improve patient outcomes. 18 Impaired oxygen delivery is a critical driver of cell demise in the ischemic penumbra. Thus, increasing tissue oxygen content seems a logical approach to improve tissue survival until reperfusion occurs. Proof-of-principle stems from several rodent studies demonstrating that normobaric hyperoxia enhanced tissue O 2 concentration in the penumbra and improved aerobic metabolism as well as neuronal integrity. Moreover, final infarct sizes were significantly reduced when timely reperfusion was achieved during normobaric hyperoxia treatment. Yet, in the absence of reperfusion no or only marginal reduction in the final infarct size was observed. 3 , 4 , 19 , 20 Consistent with preclinical observations, a single small clinical pilot study testing normobaric hyperoxia showed early preservation of the ischemic penumbra but no durable effect on neurological outcome in the absence of reperfusion. 3 , 4 , 19 , 21 Results from subsequent small randomized clinical trials conducted in patients not eligible for recanalization therapies showed no conclusive benefit with normobaric hyperoxia. 4 The only randomized clinical trial specifically seeking to determine the efficacy and safety of adjunct normobaric hyperoxia to standard acute LVO stroke treatment is still ongoing [ 5 , 22 , 23 NCT03500939 ]; thus it remains to be shown whether supplemental oxygen treatment may safely improve outcome in stroke. In this study, we show that the oxygen carrier OMX-IS delays infarct progression in a dog LVO model. Extrapolated to human stroke, our observation that OMX-IS delays infarct evolution by up to 60 min would translate to 120 million fewer neurons dying and 3.6 years less accelerated brain aging. Put in a clinical context, this would be associated with a 4.4% increase in achieving independent ambulation at discharge, 3.2% reduction of in-hospital mortality/hospice discharge, 0.8% decrease in symptomatic hemorrhage. 24 Moreover, 15.6% more patients would have a less-disabled outcome at 3 months including 10% more patients who would achieve functional independence. 25 Finally, penumbral freezing could increase the total number of patients eligible for endovascular thrombectomy in situations where transfer delay from a non-endovascular center to a hospital capable of delivering such interventions would render patients ineligible due to progressive stroke evolution. 26 27 , 28 Our dog LVO model closely mimics the clinical scenario with the presence of animals with fast versus slow infarct evolution. 29 The ability to predict fast versus slow stroke evolution based on rTTP maps from PW-MRI enabled pre-defined stratified analyses to reduce the impact of the inherent between-subject variability in infarct progression. Arguably, this approach is of high translational value because it allows to inform treatment specific efficacy for fast versus slow evolvers, which has important implications for translating results to the clinic such as for selecting patients likely to benefit. For example, one would expect that the impact of a treatment aimed at halting infarct progression would be greater in the case of faster developing infarction, which is confirmed in this study. Fast evolvers showed a significant delay in the HTC of the infarct growth by 58 min after receiving OMX-IS, which is ~20% delay relative to total time needed for the infarct maturation in this dog LVO model. Conversely, this effect was attenuated in slow evolvers, which did not show a significant change in HTC between control and treated groups. Nevertheless, the lack of a significant difference was in part related to the lower sample size after exclusion of animals with disparate infarct volumes; the observed trend still suggests that the treated group had a delay of 43 min compared to the control group. In sum, our findings highlight the potential for OMX-IS treatment to delay infarct growth. 13 Our model has limitations. This was a short-term, permanent MCA occlusion model. Future work should consider performing the OMX-IS treatment in combination with mechanical thrombectomy with longer-term functional outcome as the primary endpoint. We plan to conduct these experiments in our recently published model that includes mechanical thrombectomy. We elected to use the dog model since endovascular occlusion of the MCA is reliable with an autologous clot as opposed to the pig and sheep models that require a craniotomy due to the rete mirabile. 14 However, the endovascular model has a risk of spontaneous recanalization, which occurred in one animal in our study that subsequently was excluded from the analysis. Finally, we used young animals without co-morbidities that may have impacted the positive results of the study. 30 Conclusions Consistent with the delay in ischemic lesion evolution, we found that OMX-IS treatment significantly reduced the extent of the normalized final ADC infarct volume at the end of the experiment at 5 h post-MCAO when compared to untreated controls. Likewise, although in OMX-IS treated slow evolvers the normalized final ADC infarct volume was numerically smaller than in untreated controls, this difference did not reach significance indicating that fast evolvers sustain a greater benefit from penumbral freezing than slow evolvers. Together with prior data demonstrating the capacity of another OMX drug formulation to oxygenate severely hypoxic ischemic heart tissue and restore heart function, our current results in the dog LVO model suggest that this class of oxygen carriers has the potential to alleviate hypoxia and promote brain tissue survival in acute stroke care. Infarct evolution was delayed following the systemic administration of OMX-IS. Our observations suggested a greater drug effect in fast evolvers, which would be a critical advantage for clinical application as fast evolvers are at greatest risk for deterioration and reduced efficacy of recanalization therapy. 10 Supplementary Material